arXiv:2411.02278v1 [cs.SE] 4 Nov 2024

Is This the Same Code? A Comprehensive Study of Decompilation
Techniques for WebAssembly Binaries
Wei-Cheng Wu

Yutian Yan

Hallgrimur David Egilsson

wei-cheng.wu.gr@darmouth.edu
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH, USA

yutianya@usc.edu
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA, USA

egilsson@usc.edu
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA, USA

David Park

Steven Chan

Christophe Hauser

dpark946@usc.edu
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA, USA

sychan@usc.edu
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA, USA

christophe.hauser@dartmouth.edu
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH, USA

Weihang Wang
weihangw@usc.edu
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA, USA

ABSTRACT
WebAssembly (abbreviated WASM) is a low-level bytecode language
designed for client-side execution in web browsers. As WASM continues to gain widespread adoption and its security concerns, the
need for decompilation techniques that recover high-level source
code from WASM binaries has grown. However, little research has
been done to assess the quality of decompiled code from WASM.
This paper aims to fill this gap by conducting a comprehensive
comparative analysis between decompiled C code from WASM binaries and state-of-the-art native binary decompilers. To achieve
this goal, we presented a novel framework for empirically evaluating C-based decompilers from various aspects, thus assessing
the proficiency of WASM decompilers in generating readable and
correct code when compared to native binary decompilers. Specifically, we evaluated the decompiled code’s correctness, readability,
and structural similarity with the original code from current WASM
decompilers. We validated the proposed metrics’ practicality in
decompiler assessment and provided insightful observations regarding the characteristics and constraints of existing decompiled
code. By encouraging improvements in these tools, we seek to enhance their use in critical tasks such as auditing and sandboxing
third-party libraries. This, in turn, contributes to bolstering the
security and reliability of software systems that rely on WASM and
native binaries.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Security and privacy → Software reverse engineering.

KEYWORDS
WebAssembly, WASM, Decompiler, Reverse Engineering

1

INTRODUCTION

WebAssembly (WASM) is a portable, low-level language designed
for near-native execution on the web [45]. Since it was first introduced by Haas et al. in 2017 [18] and initially developed for
web browsers [50], its application has extended to diverse areas,

including Internet of Things [17, 27], mobile devices [42], smart
contracts [31], and its dedicated runtime environments [1, 16]. Notably, WASM is commonly used as a compilation target for popular
high-level languages like C, C++, and Rust [20].
Despite its reputation for safety, WASM binaries still exhibit
security vulnerabilities. Around 65% of WASM binaries suffer from
classic stack-based exploits commonly found in native binaries [20],
such as stack-based buffer overflows [7, 33] and stack overflows [20].
The absence of standard memory protections, like stack canaries
or guard pages, renders these vulnerabilities effective.
Given the growing adoption of WASM, inspecting third-party
binaries for potential security vulnerabilities has become imperative. However, the low-level nature of WASM bytecode makes it
challenging to audit compared to high-level code, such as C. Additionally, 28.8% of WASM binaries are minified [20], obfuscating
variable/function names and making manual inspection cumbersome. To address these challenges, security experts can leverage
decompilers to analyze high-level code instead of grappling with
thousands of lines of minified low-level WASM code.
However, WASM decompilers have received less attention than
decompilers designed for native binaries. Over the years, significant progress has been made in developing powerful native binary
decompilers that can accurately generate decompiled code for C
and C++ programs. Recent studies have also focused on enhancing
the readability of decompiled code [9, 46].
To this end, we perform a comprehensive study to assess the
effectiveness of state-of-the-art WASM decompilers.
We will be approaching from two directions, as there are two
different types of decompilers for WASM: decompilers tailored for
readability, and decompilers focus on correctness, i.e., the decompiled code adheres to the behavior of the original WASM program.
Their performance is compared with off-the-shelf native binary
decompilers [24, 40]. To evaluate these decompilers, we utilize various widely-used complexity metrics for source code and adopt
methodologies presented in previous studies [28, 47, 53]. Our study
focuses on the following three aspects:

SecureComm 2024, October 2024, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

W. Wu et al.

• Correctness of the decompiled code (Section 3.1);
• Readability of the decompiled code (Section 3.2);
• Structural similarity between the decompiled code and the
original code (Section 3.3).

7 vulnerable ( "aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa\04" ) ;
8}

With our research, we aim to draw attention to the capabilities
of WASM decompilers and the performance of native binary decompilers. By encouraging improvements in these tools, we seek to
enhance their use in essential tasks such as auditing and sandboxing third-party libraries [37]. This, in turn, contributes to bolstering
the security and reliability of software systems that rely on WASM
and native binaries.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:

1 (func $f1 (type 14) (param i32) ;; function vulnerable
2
( local i32 )
3
global . get 0
;; stack header
4
i32 . const 16
5
i32 . sub
6
local . tee 1
7
global . set 0
8
local . get 1
9
i32 . const 8
10
i32 . add
;; parameter buf
11
local . get 0
;; parameter bar
12
call $f2 ;; call function f2 (stpcpy)
13
;; 4 lines omitted
14
)
15 (func $f2 (type 21) (param i32 i32 )
16
( local i32 )
17
block
18
block
19
local . get 0
20
;; 93 lines omitted
21
br_if 0 (; @2;)
22
end
23
end)

• First attempt to evaluate WebAssembly decompilers: As
far as we know, we are the first ones to investigate the correctness, readability, and structural similarity of decompilers for
WebAssembly. We have created quantifiable and comprehensive
metrics, which can be used as useful tools to evaluate the quality of decompiled code. The decompilers are tested on popular
benchmarks, synthesized programs, and real-life scenarios to
assess their adaptability to various inputs.
• Inconsistencies of decompiling WASM vs. native binaries:
Our investigation delved into the underlying reasons for inconsistencies arising when decompiling WASM vs. native binaries.
These observations highlighted several critical issues, including
aggressive compiler optimization, WASM language features, and
platform-specific concerns.
• First analysis framework for decompiled C code: We propose the first comprehensive analysis framework to empirically
measure the quality of decompiled C code. We will open-source
our benchmark and analysis framework, which can be used for
future studies and further advancements in decompilers and
WASM analysis.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, we
present examples of the decompiled code from current WASM
decompilers. In Section 3 and Section 4, we describe the metrics
and mechanisms we used to evaluate the decompilers. The results
of our evaluation are presented in Section 5. In Section 6, we discuss
the limitations of our study and future work. Finally, we discuss
related work in Section 7 and conclude the paper in Section 8.

2

Listing 2: Wasm program in WAT (simplified)

Listing 3: Decompiled code (simplified) by wasm-decompile
1 function f1 (a : int ) {
2 var b: int = g_a − 16;
3 g_a = b;
4 f2 (b + 8, a) ;
5 g_a = b + 16;
6}
7
8 function f2 (a : int , b: int ) {
9 var c : int ;
10 if (( a ^ b) & 3) goto B_b;
11 // 27 lines omitted
12 }

Listing 4: C program performing summation
1 int sum(int n) {
2 int sum = 0;
3 for ( int i = 1; i <= n; i++)
4
sum += i ;
5 return sum;
6}

MOTIVATION

The main goal of this paper is to assess the effectiveness of current
decompilers for the WebAssembly (WASM) language and determine
their limitations, particularly in their ability to reconstruct source
code from WASM precisely.
We present a motivating example to demonstrate how code readability is enhanced by introducing a decompiler. The example is
taken from the paper [26] and showcases a stack overflow vulnerability in both C and WASM.
Listing 1: C program performing stack overflow (simplified)
1 void vulnerable (char ∗bar) {
2 char buf [8];
3 strcpy (buf , bar) ; // no bounds checking
4}
5
6 int main() {

Listing 5: Decompiled code (simplified) by wasm-decompile
1 int f2 ( int n) {
2
if (n <= 0) { return 0; }
3 return n − 1 ∗ n − 2 >> 1 + n << 1 − 1}

The C source code in Listing 1 contains the vulnerable function, which utilizes the unsafe strcpy function. This is dangerous
because strcpy lacks an input size check and can trigger the buffer
overflow if bar is larger than buf, which is exactly what Listing 1
does.
The C source code is compiled into WASM code using Emscripten [11]. WASM code is binary and not human-readable, so
it is converted into WAT (WebAssembly Text) format. The WAT
code is shown in Listing 2. The $f1 function (corresponding to the
vulnerable function in the source code, function name striped)

Is This the Same Code? A Comprehensive Study of Decompilation Techniques for WebAssembly Binaries

calls the $f2 (stpcpy as aforesaid) function. $f2 implements the
similar functionality as the strcpy function in the C standard library1 . The $f2 function has 101 LoC (Lines of Code). Since this
function is implemented in WASM and does not depend on external
functions, one cannot confirm its vulnerability nature without fully
understanding it and realizing its similarity to the stpcpy in the C
standard library.
We use wasm-decompile [13] to convert the WASM program
back into C-like code (Listing 3). The decompiled code has improved
readability with 31 LOC (C-like) compared to 101 LOC of WAT. The
decreased LoC indicates the improved readability of the program.
However, we also need to point out that compared to the original program in Listing 1, the decompiled program has increased
LoC, and the parameter data type of function f1 is different from
vulnerable (we would explain this in Section 5), which shows the
improvement comparing with the WASM binary and limitations
regarding the original code.
Besides readability, WASM decompilers may generate incorrect
results, which breaks the correctness of the decompiled code. To
demonstrate this, we tested a simple C program that contains a sum
function (see Listing 4). We compiled the C program into WASM
and retained the exported function symbols. We then used wasmdecompile to convert the WASM program into C-like code (Listing 5)
and found that the decompiled code was incorrect. Specifically, line
3 in the decompiled code, which calculates the sum from 1 to n,
returns 2𝑛 − 2 instead of the correct result, 𝑛(𝑛 + 1)/2. This could
potentially mislead reverse engineers working with the WASM
code, leading them to manually check the WASM code instead of
the decompiled one to ensure its functionality.
The observed differences between the original and decompiled
code raised the following intuitive questions that we aim to address
in this paper:
• Q1: To what extent can we trust the decompiled code to present
the underlying program’s functionality accurately? In other words,
how do we examine the correctness of the decompiled code?
Ensuring that the decompiled code faithfully reproduces the
original program’s functionality is crucial for reliable reverse
engineering and code analysis.
• Q2: Some examples of decompiled code (e.g., Listing 3) could still
be too long to understand for developers. Is there an automated
and objective way to measure the readability of the decompiled
code? Quantifying readability would provide valuable insights
into the code’s understandability, maintainability, and ease of
debugging.
• Q3: Sometimes, even if a piece of code is initially difficult to
understand, it may still be comprehensible if we can observe a
similar structure in the original source code. Can we quantify
the structural similarity between the decompiled code and the
original source code in addition to assessing readability? Measuring structural similarity can help determine how closely the
decompiled code resembles the original, aiding in code comprehension and validation.

1 The only difference between stpcpy and strcpy is the return value. stpcpy returns

a pointer to the terminating \0 character of the target string while strcpy returns a
pointer to the beginning of the string. Both functions are vulnerable to stack overflow.

SecureComm 2024, October 2024, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

Addressing these questions is crucial for advancing the capabilities of decompilers and enhancing the accuracy and usability of
decompiled code in various application domains.

3

METHODOLOGY

To answer Q1-Q3 from Section 2, we introduced a series of techniques to comprehensively evaluate existing WASM decompilers
in terms of the decompiled output’s correctness, readability, and
structural similarity to the original code.
To establish a baseline for comparison, we used the decompiled
results obtained from native binary decompilers. We reasoned that
these tools have undergone rigorous development and real-world
utilization over the years, making them reliable reference points.
To conduct our evaluation, we carefully selected a consistent
set of C programs and compiled them separately into both native
binaries and WASM files. Subsequently, we applied the chosen
decompilers to reverse-engineer the executable files and obtain the
decompiled C code from both sides. We then conducted a functionlevel comparison between the decompiled outputs from native
binaries and WASM.
For correctness, we further re-compiled the decompiled code into
executable files and executed them to test whether they preserved
the same functionality as the original C code. This step allows us
to verify the accuracy of the decompilers in faithfully reproducing
the intended behavior of the original programs.
Regarding readability and structural similarity, we applied various metrics commonly used in software engineering to evaluate
the decompiled code.
An overview workflow of our methodology can be found in
Figure 1.

3.1

Correctness

The accuracy of decompilation tools plays a crucial role in software
development, security, and reverse engineering. A perfectly accurate decompiled program should be capable of being re-compiled
back into executable files and exhibit the same functionality as the
original binary.
However, most state-of-the-art decompilers prioritize enhancing
the readability of the decompiled code, which often results in C
pseudo-code that may not strictly adhere to correct syntax. Additionally, these tools typically focus on analyzing the semantics per
function and may struggle with reasoning about data structures or
global variable access, which are commonly used in C programs.
In short, while readability is a crucial aspect of decompilation,
accessing the correctness of decompiled code presents two main
challenges:

C1: Decompilers often produce C-like code that is not directly
re-compilable, emphasizing readability over perfect accuracy in
reproducing the original binary.
C2: Decompilers may face difficulties effectively handling global
variables and memory pointers, which can lead to discrepancies in
the decompiled code.

SecureComm 2024, October 2024, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

W. Wu et al.

Figure 1: Overview of methodology workflow
On the other hand, WASM decompilers inherently incorporate
features that facilitate code re-compilability (effectively addressing C1). However, challenges persist in generating re-executable
programs due to the inherent nature of WASM and its primary use
as a library and function within web browsers. Two properties of
WASM introduce divergences in the decompiled code:
• Differences in memory management and representation:
WASM employs a stack-based, linear memory model, which contrasts with the memory management and representation used in
traditional native binaries. This property poses C2 as a challenge
for WASM decompilers.
• Usage of embedded environment-specific functions:
During decompilation, certain operations, such as standard C
library functions that access system resources like memory, files,
networks, and devices, are transformed into system-call-like functions that exclusively exist within the JavaScript environment of
the web browser.
The second property of WASM leads to the third challenge for
evaluating the correctness of decompiled WASM:
C3: While decompiled WASM programs are represented as C code,
they commonly cannot be executed directly in a native environment due to the absence of necessary runtime libraries. Additionally, these decompiled programs faithfully reproduce operations
as if they were intended to be used as library modules within web
browsers. As a result, they lack entry points for direct execution
outside the WASM environment, making it infeasible to execute
them in a non-WASM context.
To address the three challenges (C1, C2, and C3) in evaluating the correctness of decompiled WASM code, we leveraged the
synthesized code generated by DecFuzzer [28] and implemented
a sandbox environment for the execution of wasm2c decompiled
code.
To the best of our knowledge, DecFuzzer is the only publicly
available work that empirically assesses the correctness of native
binary decompilers. It generated code containing only local-variable
arithmetic computations into one single “core function”, ensuring
full decompilability for all existing decompilers (C2). Subsequently,
they syntactically restructured the decompiled code to make it recompilable (C1). The process concluded with the re-compilation of
the code, and they compared the output of the re-compiled binary
with the original binary’s execution results to verify correctness.

As the synthesized programs generated by DecFuzzer do not
utilize any library functions or global variables, they are suitable
for porting to WASM decompilers too. We modified them to tackle
further C2 and C3 for WASM. Specifically, we first transformed
the synthesized programs into functionally stand-alone modules.
This step ensures the compiled WASM is self-contained and does
not depend on external runtime libraries and global variables (C2).
Next, we implemented a sandbox environment to load and execute
the decompiled WASM code (C3). This essentially makes it possible to execute the decompiled WASM code in the native binary
environment so that we can compare it with the original binary’s
execution results to verify correctness.
We present the detailed implementation in Section 4.1.

3.2

Readability

In our study, we introduced several metrics to quantify the readability and complexity of the decompiled programs automatically.
To assess the complexity of the code, we selected several common
algorithms commonly used in software engineering. This includes
Lines of code, Max nesting depth, Cyclomatic complexity, and Halstead complexity measures. Generally, the higher the value of these
metrics, the more complex and harder to read the code is. We briefly
introduce these metrics below:
• Lines of code. Lines of code measures the total number of lines in
the code, indicating the code’s size and complexity. In our study,
we counted only the physical lines in the text of the program’s
source code, excluding comments and blanks [39]. Generally, a
higher number of lines indicates a more complex and potentially
harder-to-read code.
• Max nesting depth. This metric calculates the maximum depth
of nested structures, such as loops (e.g., for, while) and conditionals (e.g., if), within the code. A higher value implies deeper
nesting, indicating increased complexity and reduced readability [32],.
• Cyclomatic complexity. Cyclomatic complexity measures a
program’s control-flow complexity [30]. It quantifies the number
of linearly independent paths through the code, representing the
number of decision points and possible execution paths. Higher
cyclomatic complexity values suggest more intricate code structures, making the code more difficult to comprehend. For implementation, as we are comparing function-to-function instead
of the whole program, we simply count the number of decision
points in the function (such as an if statement or for statement).

Is This the Same Code? A Comprehensive Study of Decompilation Techniques for WebAssembly Binaries

SecureComm 2024, October 2024, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

Table 1: List of readability and structural similarity metrics
Metric
Line of Code
Max Nesting Depth
Cyclomatic Complexity
Halstead Complexity Measure
# of goto, # of variables,
# of cast, # of dead assignments

Definition
Source Lines of Code
Depth of the most nested statement
# of linearly independent paths (Control-Flow Complexity)
Score proportional to operators and operands (Data-Flow Complexity)

Range
[0, ∞)
[0, ∞)
[1, ∞)
[0, ∞)

-

[0, ∞)

AST Node Quantity Compare
AST Tree Edit Distance

Common types of nodes between two ASTs
Tree edit distance between two ASTs

[0, 1]
[0, 1]

• Halstead complexity measures. The Halstead complexity measures a program’s data-flow complexity [51]. The original algorithm includes various metrics such as program vocabulary,
program length, volume, difficulty, and effort. These measures
assess the overall complexity of the code based on the number
of distinct operators and operands used and their frequency of
occurrence. In our study, we only calculated program effort for
decompiled code.
In addition to the above algorithms, we carefully selected a subset
of metrics from previous decompiler works [47, 53] that are suitable
for our function-to-function comparison. Specifically, these works
aimed to reduce the reliance on goto statements in the decompiled
code, recognizing their potential complexity in comprehension.
Other properties, such as the number of cast and dead assignments,
are also evaluated for the presented decompilers.
The full list of metrics used in our research is presented in Table 1.
We prioritize extensibility and scalability in our metric selection,
and to achieve this, we do not include user studies in the scope of our
work. By incorporating these metrics, we aim to comprehensively
evaluate the readability and complexity of the decompiled programs,
providing valuable insights for future decompiler development and
analysis.

3.3

Structural Similarity

The Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) is widely used for expressing and
analyzing program structures. In this paper, we propose utilizing
the AST to represent the structure of a program and then compare
the AST of the original code with that of the decompiled code
to determine their structural similarity. During the comparison
of ASTs, we only consider the “type” of each node and not their
specific values. For instance, in Figure 2, we solely compare the
type of each node (represented by colors) and not the actual content
of each node (e.g., “+”, “*”, “a”, and “b”). The main reason for this
design is that we focus only on the structural differences with this
metric and leave the numerical evaluation to correctness section.
We employed two comparison algorithms to measure the similarity: Node quantity compare (NQC) and Tree edit distance (TED).
Node quantity compare. In NQC, we count the number of nodes
with the same type between two ASTs. The formula to calculate
𝑁𝑄𝐶𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 is shown in Equation 1. The score range falls between
[0, 1], where a higher score indicates a higher similarity between
the two ASTs regarding shared nodes.
∑︁ 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑜𝑛 # 𝑜 𝑓 𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ 𝑡 𝑦𝑝𝑒 𝑜 𝑓 𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠
𝑚𝑎𝑥 {𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑜𝑛𝑒 𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒 }

(1)

(a) Tree A

(b) Tree B

Figure 2: An example of AST comparison

Take the two ASTs from Figure 2 for example. Among the trees,
one 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 node, one green node (operation node), and two red
nodes (variable nodes) are common. The total nodes in Trees A and
B are 4 and 6, respectively. Therefore, the score of NQC between
1+1+2
these two trees is 𝑁𝑄𝐶𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = 𝑚𝑎𝑥
{4,6} = 0.67. This score indicates a relatively high level of structural similarity between the two
trees in terms of common nodes.
Tree edit distance. The Tree edit distance (TED) algorithm calculates the number of steps required to transform one tree into
another. Traditionally, the TED algorithm counts the costs of three
operations: insert, delete, and replace. In our current implementation, we adopt a simplified approach. We calculate the differences
in depths for each node, which means we only consider the insert
and delete operations. We do not compare the content of each
node during this process. By focusing solely on the differences in
depths and considering only insert and delete operations, our
implementation provides a straightforward and efficient way to
measure the similarity between two trees.
The recursive formula for computing 𝑇 𝐸𝐷𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 is shown in Equation 2. Let 𝐹 1 = 𝑇1 [𝑖..𝑗] be the post-order sub-forest of 𝑇1 and let 𝑟 1
denote its rightmost root. Also, let 𝑅1 be the rightmost tree of 𝐹 1
(the one rooted at 𝑟 1 ). The same notation holds for 𝑇2 :

SecureComm 2024, October 2024, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

𝑇 𝐸𝐷 ( ∅, ∅ ) = 0

W. Wu et al.

(2)

𝑇 𝐸𝐷 (𝐹 1 , ∅ ) = 𝑇 𝐸𝐷 (𝐹 1 − 𝑟 1 , ∅ ) + 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑑𝑒𝑙
𝑇 𝐸𝐷 ( ∅, 𝐹 2 ) = 𝑇 𝐸𝐷 ( ∅, 𝐹 2 − 𝑟 2 ) + 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑠
𝑇 𝐸𝐷 (𝐹 1 , 𝐹 2 ) =


𝑇 𝐸𝐷 (𝐹 1 − 𝑟 1 , 𝐹 2 ) + 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑑𝑒𝑙

𝑚𝑖𝑛 𝑇 𝐸𝐷 (𝐹 1 , 𝐹 2 − 𝑟 2 ) + 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑠

𝑇 𝐸𝐷 (𝐹 − 𝑟 , 𝐹 − 𝑟 ) + 𝑇 𝐸𝐷 (𝑅 − 𝑟 , 𝑅 − 𝑟 )
1
1 2
1
1
1 2
2


𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑑𝑒𝑙 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑠 = 1

In the case of native binary decompilation, we employed two
open-source decompilers that were previously evaluated in the
DecFuzzer paper: Ghidra [40] and RetDec [24]. These tools have
been widely used and evaluated in various decompilation tasks,
making them suitable candidates for our evaluation.

3.5

Benchmarks

We use the 1,000 CSmith synthesized C programs from DecFuzzer
for correctness. In the original work of DecFuzzer, the authors
We also normalize and reverse the distance to 𝑇 𝐸𝐷𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 into
further mutated them to test decompilers rigorously. We considvalues between [0, 1]. 𝑇 𝐸𝐷 (𝑇1,𝑇2 ) represents the TED distance
ered 1,000 programs reasonable for our attempt to examine WASM
between trees 𝑇1 and 𝑇2 , while |𝑇1 | and |𝑇2 | denote the total number
decompilers, and we did not mutate them further.
of nodes in each respective tree. The larger the 𝑇 𝐸𝐷𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 we obtain,
For evaluating structural similarity and readability, we employed
the more structurally closer the two trees are.
two widely used C benchmark suites: PolyBenchC [43] and CH𝑇 𝐸𝐷 (𝑇1 ,𝑇2 )
Stone [19]. These benchmark suites contain real-world program
(3)
𝑇 𝐸𝐷𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = 1 −
|𝑇1 | + |𝑇2 |
implementations that are likely to be used in the WASM environment, such as scientific visualization, encryption, simulation, image
For the example shown in Figure 2, with Equation 2, The TED
recognition, etc.
distance between the two trees is 0.199, resulting in a 𝑇 𝐸𝐷𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 of
We opted not to include the programs from DecFuzzer for struc0.801 (1 - 0.199). This score indicates a relatively high structural
tural similarity and readability evaluation for two main reasons.
similarity between the two trees.
Firstly, we found that since DecFuzzer’s synthesized programs may
contain dead code, some portions of the code are automatically
removed during compiling, even when setting the compiler opti3.4 Compilers & Decompilers
mization level to 0. This results in the decompilers not handling the
In our C-to-WASM compilation process, we opted to use Emscripten
exact same program as the original one, making it less reasonable
(emcc) [11], a comprehensive compiler toolchain for WASM built
to include these programs.
on LLVM [25]. As emcc utilizes LLVM as its foundation, we chose
Secondly, the original synthesized code from DecFuzzer is not
to employ clang to generate the native binary to ensure consistency
designed
for human readers and contains no specific meaning or
in both compilation and re-compilation. Additionally, we aimed to
intended functionality. Consequently, including these programs in
set the compilation options to be identical to those used within the
the evaluation would not be meaningful for assessing decompiled
emcc implementation.
code’s structural similarity and readability.
For the WASM decompilation process, we utilized three widely
used WASM decompilers: wasm2c [14], w2c2 [36], and wasm-decompile [4]. In contrast, PolyBenchC and CHStone are not used in the correctness evaluation due to their inclusion of library calls, which
Wasm2c is part of the WABT WebAssembly tool set [12]. It conare challenging for both native and WASM decompilers to handle
verts a WASM binary file to C source code along with the auxiliary
correctly during runtime. Therefore, we reserved these benchmark
header and supports various experimental WASM features, such as
suites to assess the structural similarity and readability aspects of
exceptions and threading, by incorporating specific command-line
the decompiled programs.
options. Wasm2c can generate bug-free C programs that can be
compiled and executed, and the behavior of the recompiled program is expected to adhere to the original program; that is, the
correctness of the program shall hold.
Wasm-decompile [4] is also a component of WABT toolset. The
reason to include another tool from the WABT toolset is that wasmdecompile and wasm2c have very different design goals, and the
difference is significant enough to include both decompilers in our
study (see Sec. 5). Wasm-decompile “is aimed at users that want to
be able to ‘read’ large volumes of Wasm code [4]." Decompiled code
generated by wasm-decompile is not designed to "be a programming
language," that is, the functionality of recompilation is currently
not provided, and the execution correctness of the decompiled code
is not guaranteed. In conclusion, wasm-decompile focuses on the
decompiled code’s readability and not correctness.
W2c2 [36] is a standalone tool that translates WASM modules
to portable C. While it supports basic WebAssembly features, it
also includes three experimental WASM features: bulk memory
operations, sign-extension operators, and non-trapping float-to-int
conversions.

4

IMPLEMENTATION

The total scripts for compiling benchmarks and generating metrics
contain around 5,000 lines of Python and shell scripts.

4.1

Correctness

DecFuzzer utilized CSmith [55], a widely recognized C-code synthesizer for compiler testing, to generate C code for evaluating
decompilers. In its original form, the generated code operated on
global variables and computed a checksum to verify execution results. DecFuzzer consolidated the synthesized code into a single
function, func, and operated on local copies of the original global
variables. As func contains no library calls or global variable access, it can be fully compiled and decompiled by state-of-the-art
decompilers. To generate re-compilable code, DecFuzzer deployed a
simple rewriter to fix the syntax errors in decompiled code. Finally,
the rewritten code was re-compiled and executed to test against
the original binary.

Is This the Same Code? A Comprehensive Study of Decompilation Techniques for WebAssembly Binaries

To adapt DecFuzzer for WASM, we wrapped func into an importable module that can be called and receive output from the
main function. This module-based approach was chosen because
the WASM code handles memory differently, making it challenging
to create a complete program that can be executed natively. Luckily,
as a standalone WASM module, the code can be imported and called
within a testing framework simulating a browser environment. This
modified code was then compiled to WASM, decompiled back to C,
re-compiled to object files, and eventually imported and called by
our sandbox testing framework.
Besides the above efforts, we upgraded DecFuzzer’s syntax rewriters to match the latest compiler and decompiler versions. We also
switched from using GCC to clang, which aligned better with the
WASM toolchain and resulted in fewer errors during preliminary
testing. To make the DecFuzzer code compatible with WASM, we
created a Python converter with approximately 300 lines of code.
Additionally, we patched the legacy RLBox[58] code to match the
latest WASM toolchain and integrated it into our evaluation framework for sandbox testing. Besides, w2c2 is skipped for our correctness evaluation due to the current lack of support for sandboxing
the w2c2 decompiled code.

4.2

5

• How does each decompiler perform in terms of the specific metrics?

5.1

Correctness

Table 2 shows the result of our correctness evaluation. Factors are
based on DecFuzzer, including execution results and the number of
decompile or re-compile failures.
From the table, we can clearly see that wasm2c outperformed
native binary decompilers by achieving a 100% correctness rate. We
attribute this success to the fact that wasm2c adopts a conservative
approach when translating WASM to decompiled code: Performing
minimal optimizations. Consequently, when the execution environment was appropriately set up, the decompiled code faithfully
reproduced the original functionality. This high correctness rate
can also be attributed to the more uncomplicated instruction set in
WASM compared to native binary code. Therefore, it’s relatively
simple to translate WASM bytecode to C code directly, whereas
native binary decompilers often face challenges in handling lowlevel instructions. Propagating these instructions as functions in
the decompiled code without providing corresponding runtime
implementations often leads to re-compile failures.

Readability & Structural Similarity

For readability and structural similarity, we built the analysis on top
of clang Python API [10] and cppcheck [29]. As Clang API relies on
the Clang preprocessor, the under-analyzing target must be C syntactically correct. We leveraged the syntax rewriter of DecFuzzer to
try to make the native binary’s decompiled code re-compilable. Due
to the limitation of the preprocessor, it cannot parse the decompiled
code generated by wasm-decompile under optimization level 1 or
2, as the code would break the type system during the analysis
progress.

EVALUATION RESULTS

As introduced in the previous chapters, we evaluated the state-ofthe-art WASM decompilers, w2c2, wasm2c, and wasm-decompile,
in three aspects: correctness, readability of the decompiled code,
and structural similarity of the decompiled code with the source
code. Based on decompiler characteristics introduced in Section 3.4,
w2c2 is excluded from the correctness evaluation, and the structural
similarity evaluation of wasm-decompile is limited.
To establish a baseline for comparison, we also included decompilers of native binaries, namely Ghidra and RetDec. All experiments
were performed on an Intel-i5 machine with four cores, 8GB RAM,
and running ArchLinux. To ensure the validity of the results, we
used the latest versions of all software.
For the selected benchmarks, we observed that the compiling and
decompiling processes could be completed within five seconds without significant memory consumption. Given the swift execution of
these processes, we did not measure and compare the decompilers’
runtime performance. Instead, our focus was solely on evaluating
the quality of the generated code.
In each section of the evaluation, we address the following questions through the use of proposed metrics:
• Can proposed metrics help evaluate and characterize decompilers?

SecureComm 2024, October 2024, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

Table 2: Correctness results.
Bench
wasm2c
wasm-decompile
Ghidra
RetDec

Success
1,000
649
818
775

Re-compile Failure
0
6
13
0

Exec. Discrepancy
0
345
169
225

Total

1,000

Compared to wasm2c, the other three decompilers all suffer
from compilation failure and execution discrepancies. First, as presented to be a decompiler to improve readability for WASM, wasmdecompile is only able to achieve 649 out of 1000 program correct.
We manually reviewed the semantically incorrect code, and summarized the reason for failures into two main reason:
Unfaithful representation of the original WASM workflow
In order to improve redability, wasm-decompile translates WASM’s
stack-based instructions into SSA formats, which is theoretically
more readable for human than long lines of C code in wasm2c.
However, this transformation also introduces errors in the value
passing and data flow, which leads to the incorrect execution of the
decompiled code.
False identification of structures and pointers In the synthesized benchmark for testing correctness, we introduce no pointer
or special data structure to reduce the complexity of evaluation.
However, wasm-decompile falsely grouped some of the variables as
data structures and accessed through pointer offsets on stack. This
not only results in violation of C syntax that resulted in incompilabiity, but potentially introduce rooms for more error to preserve
the original program’s semantic. Moreover, it conversely increases
the difficulty for understanding the decompile code.
We showed a code snippet of the decompile output for wasmdecompile in Listing 6. The first part of the code is how wasmdecompile translates function epilogue. As all function parameters
are stored on stack and then loaded during function calls, wasmdecompile may falsely group some parameters as one data structure,
while the original program actually only passes integer values.

SecureComm 2024, October 2024, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

The latter part of the listing shows how variable type casting is
represented with wasm-decompile. The variable n is a 32-bit integer
casting to 8-bit and stored into q. This kind of operation sequence
is conducted through out the decompile code, making the code not
only long and hard to read, but also introducing correctness errors
throughout the long dependency chain.
Listing 6: Code snippet of decompile code generated by wasmdecompile
1 export function func_1 () : int {
2 var a : int = stack_pointer ;
3 var b: int = 16;
4 var c :{ a : int , b: int /∗ ... ∗/ } = a − b;
5 stack_pointer = c ;
6
7 var f : int = −1051244671;
8 c.b = f ;
9 var g: int = 1902055121;
10 c . a = g;
11 // ....
12 var o: int = 24;
13 var p: int = n << o;
14 var q: int = p >> o;
15 // ....
16 }

For native-binary decompilers, both Ghidra and RetDec achieved
slightly better results than wasm-decompile, but still have a significant number of failures. The main reason for the failures is the
decompilers’ capabilities of translating low-level instructions to
high-level C code. For such instructions, the decompilers often
directly translate them to function calls, mimicking the original
instructions. The runtime environment does not support such cases
and will either lead to re-compile failures or be falsely rewritten by
the DecFuzzer, leading to incorrect execution results. For example,
Ghidra places CONCAT as a pseudo function to translate assembly
code instructions such as mov AH, 2. While serving a purpose in
the original code, the existing DecFuzzer implementation falsely
removed it from the decompiled code to make the decompiled program re-compilable.
Summary: With the presented approach for evaluating correctness,
we highlight the remarkable 100% accuracy of wasm2c’s decompiled code. The limitation of wasm-decompile in correctness not
only emphasizes the importance of evaluating decompilers from
multiple perspectives but also underscores the challenges in recovering WASM’s stack-based instructions into high-level C code.
While native binary decompilers present some failures, it is essential to note that some may be attributed to the evaluation approach
rather than inherent issues with the decompilers themselves. More
refined evaluation methodologies and techniques can address and
improve these specific cases separately.

5.2

Readability

We conducted a comprehensive evaluation by compiling each C
code in PolyBenchC and CHStone at optimization levels 0, 1, and 2
to both WASM and native binaries and subsequently decompiled
outputs to compare their differences.

W. Wu et al.

The complete evaluation results are in Table 3 and Figure 3.
Regarding the readability metrics, higher values generally indicate
more challenging to understand.
First, by comparing the results for Lines of code, Maximum nesting depth, Cyclomatic complexity, and Halstead complexity measure,
it is evident that WASM decompilers generated significantly different code compared to others. The decompiled WASM code contains
more lines of code and variables. Structurally, it exhibits a “flattened” code with a relatively low maximum nesting depth and
Cyclomatic complexity. However, as the Halstead complexity measure indicates, the data flows are notably complicated. The low
nesting depth also comes from the fact that WASM’s decompiled
code relies heavily on goto statements. This discrepancy is mainly
due to the fundamental differences between WASM’s stack-based
instruction set and C’s register-based language. The state-of-the-art
native binary decompilers attempt to translate the code to resemble
the semantics of C code closely, while the WASM decompilers lack
such design as observed in the motivation decompiled code (Section 2), all three WASM decompilers primarily convert WASM’s
stack-based instructions into C syntax directly.
Although wasm-decompile is designed to generate readable decompiled code, it is interesting that the readability metrics do not
necessarily support this statement. With optimization level 0, decompiled code generated by wasm-decompile has a significantly
larger number in most metrics evaluated because wasm-decompile
attempts to recover the WASM semantics into readable format faithfully. However, as WASM has only a limited number of types, a
large portion of the decompiled code is related to type conversion
between variables in support of the original C programs’ semantics.
Faithfully translating these operations could help to understand
small-scale analysis of variable dependency better, but may not
necessarily improve the whole program’s readability. This is highly
reflected in the differences in the total LoC and type castings between wasm-decompile and wasm2c. wasm2c does not specify the
casting of variables in code while preserving the correct semantics
as shown in Section 5.1, while wasm-decompile explicitly shows
such program flow and resulted in higher numbers in these two
metrics.
In comparing native binary decompilers, Ghidra generally generated more compact code and was closer to the original. This
is attributed to Ghidra’s continuous development and successful
heuristics in decompiling. In contrast, RetDec produced more lines
of code and variables. This is due to its failures in recovering many
native binary instructions into high-level C code and simply migrating instructions to C functions. E.g., RetDec directly used v8 =
__asm_movsd(v3) in the decompiled code as the translation of the
instruction movsd.
For other metrics, some may not directly reflect the code’s readability but offer insights into the characteristics of the generated
decompiled code. For instance, Ghidra had excessive type casting.
This is due to its strategy for pointers and data-structure recovery,
but it may not essentially affect how we interpret the code.
Interestingly, higher compilation optimization levels have different effects on different decompilers. WASM decompilers tend to
produce more compact code at higher optimization levels, mainly
because highly optimized WASM files are smaller in size, resulting in shorter decompiled code when directly translated. However,

Is This the Same Code? A Comprehensive Study of Decompilation Techniques for WebAssembly Binaries

SecureComm 2024, October 2024, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

Table 3: Results of readability evaluation
Metrics

Opt Level

Original Code

w2c2

Decompilers
wasm-decompile

wasm2c

Ghidra

RetDec

10,376
11,290
15,575
98
175
405
138
99
92
2,883
3,261
4,952
4
4
8

4,818
7,487
9,249
21
63
131
2,872
2,520
2,958
519
760
1,110
31
7
8

Total
Lines of code

# of goto statements

# of type casting

# of variables

# Lines of dead code

Maximum nesting depth

Cyclomatic complexity

Halstead complexity measure

O0
O1
O2
O0
O1
O2
O0
O1
O2
O0
O1
O2
O0
O1
O2

74,473
24,828
27,440
767
738
584
0
0
0
16,109
1,496
1,622
64
143
513

2,619

0

39

194

4

O0
O1
O2
O0
O1
O2
O0
O1
O2

Average

Stdev

0.952

1.163

14.329

18.067

3.996

4.144

Average
1.221
1.228
1.766
3.634
5.152
5.883
43.177
46.341
55.253

Stdev
1.534
1.558
2.447
3.853
7.295
8.192
31.158
54.848
62.667

72,362
28,332
30,461
576
296
257
0
0
0
19,368
1,591
1,711
207
25
140
Average
0.655
0.600
1.462
4.924
6.766
7.359
52.026
52.563
66.963

Stdev
0.477
0.492
1.514
4.667
8.030
8.530
24.492
51.660
63.842

23,744
7,975
7,771
768
774
455
627
382
642
18,804
619
741
7
14
35
Average
1.455
1.041
1.710
6.283
6.710
6.228
26.084
30.778
36.559

Stdev
1.409
1.241
2.065
6.139
8.475
8.180
9.363
26.185
32.038

Average
1.634
1.855
2.097
6.772
7.517
9.255
30.956
31.434
30.818

Stdev
1.798
2.010
2.428
8.465
9.430
12.438
30.761
26.192
25.237

Average
1.338
2.000
1.745
4.683
7.883
9.048
36.106
35.865
42.948

Stdev
1.464
1.911
1.813
4.412
8.920
10.252
44.118
36.894
42.853

Table 4: Results of structural similarity evaluation
Metrics

Node quantity compare

Tree edit distance

Opt Level

O0
O1
O2
O0
O1
O2

w2c2
Average
0.170
0.230
0.223
0.166
0.219
0.210

Stdev
0.206
0.195
0.201
0.169
0.158
0.166

Average
0.047
0.197
0.193
0.062
0.184
0.191

this does not necessarily mean that the decompiled code more
closely resembles the original program nor improve readability.
For example, in Listing 7, we show a code snippet of decompile
code genereated by wasm-decompile with optimization level 2. It is
observable that although the total lines of code could be less as operations are shrinking into single lines, but the code is syntactically
incorrect and semantically incomprehensible for the complicated
value assignments between operations.
Listing 7: Decompiled code by wasm-decompile with compiler optimization
1 export function KeySchedule(a: int_ptr , /∗ ... ∗/ ) : int {
2
// ...
3
c = b − (g = b / i ) ∗ i ;
4
if (eqz(c) ) {
5
f = Sbox;
6
c = f + (( e = (c = (( a = word + (a << 2) ) + 1440) [0]: int ) / 16) <<
7
8
9
10
11

Decompilers
wasm-decompile

wasm2c

6) + (c − (e << 4) << 2) ;
e = f + (( d = (e = a [240]) / 16) << 6) + (e − (d << 4) << 2) ;
h = ( f + (( h = (d = a [120]) / 16) << 6) ) [d − (h << 4) ]: int ^
(Rcon0 + (g << 2) − 4) [0]: int ;
g = a [0];
goto B_q;

Stdev
0.022
0.140
0.147
0.046
0.151
0.152

Average
0.134
N/A
N/A
0.149
N/A
N/A

12
13
14 }

}
//

Stdev
0.066
N/A
N/A
0.103
N/A
N/A

Ghidra
Average
0.573
0.470
0.436
0.495
0.403
0.377

Stdev
0.260
0.284
0.304
0.236
0.236
0.256

RetDec
Average
0.506
0.378
0.357
0.439
0.343
0.325

Stdev
0.310
0.291
0.300
0.286
0.257
0.267

....

On the contrary, higher optimization levels do not necessarily lead to more compact code for native binary decompilers. Native compilers use aggressive algorithms to optimize binary size
and performance, while these optimized operations may not be
easily translated into C semantics. Decompilers typically create
highly readable code through heuristic approaches. When a binary
is highly optimized, it may not fit within the existing heuristics,
resulting in larger decompiled code with more direct assembly-to-C
translations.
Summary: The evaluation results unveil substantial differences in
the decompiled code generated by WASM decompilers. Notably, the
decompiled code exhibits excessive lines of code, frequent usage of
goto statements, and intricate data flows, all of which negatively
impact code readability.

SecureComm 2024, October 2024, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

W. Wu et al.

(a) Line of Code

(b) Maximum Nesting Depth

(c) Cyclomatic Complexity

(d) Halstead Complexity Measure

(e) Node Quantity Compare

(f) Tree Edit Distance

Figure 3: Readability and structural similarity results consistent with Tables 3 and 4.

Moreover, these metrics provide valuable insights into other
interesting aspects, such as the influence of compiler optimization
levels on each decompiler’s performance. The interplay between
these factors can be considered to be a robust indicator for assessing
the quality of decompiled code generated by the decompilers.

5.3

Structural Similarity

The evaluation of structural similarity yields similar observations
to the readability metrics. The results of structural similarity can
be found in Table 4. As we have mentioned before, due to parser
limitation, wasm-decompile-generated code can only be analyzed
under optimization level 0. The evaluation compared original and
decompiled functions by normalizing the computed Node Quantity
Compare (NQC) and Tree Edit Distance (TED) scores to a range of
[0, 1]. Higher scores indicate greater structural similarity between
the functions.
In general, the structural similarity results align with the findings
from the readability evaluation. WASM decompiled code exhibits
significant differences compared to native binary decompiled code,
and the trend of structural similarity varies with different optimization levels. Higher optimization levels lead to increased structural
similarity for WASM decompilers, while for native binary decompilers, the opposite trend is observed.
Notably, the structural similarity evaluation revealed insights
that are not evident in the readability evaluation. Specifically, the
improvements introduced by w2c2 are more apparent. We observed

several exceptional high scores for w2c2 decompiled code, corresponding to w2c2’s outliers in Figure 3e and Figure 3f. Our manual
inspection revealed that these scores are primarily associated with
pure arithmetic functions like mul64To128, which do not contain
pointers or data structures. These functions exhibit minimal structural differences between the compiled WASM and native binary.
As a result, w2c2 successfully decompiled them with high NQC
and TED scores that are closer to what native binary decompilers
obtained. In contrast, wasm2c still produced long and complicated
code for these functions.
Summary: Overall, the structural similarity evaluation provides
additional insights into the performance of decompilers. Specifically,
it highlights the effectiveness of w2c2 in handling certain types
of functions that exhibit minimal structural differences between
compiled WASM and native binary versions.

6

DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this study, we evaluated and compared state-of-the-art WASM
decompilers. To achieve our goal, we collected and integrated multiple metrics from previous works and created a comprehensive
framework for evaluating decompilers. This framework assesses
correctness, readability, and structural aspects, and includes a case
study. Through our analysis, we gained valuable insights into the
performance and capabilities of existing decompilers. However, our
investigation also revealed certain limitations and disadvantages
that warrant attention in future research endeavors.

Is This the Same Code? A Comprehensive Study of Decompilation Techniques for WebAssembly Binaries

6.1

Correctness

We evaluated the correctness of WASM decompilers that generated
compilable C code. Still, the process was limited by the absence
of a substantial portion of the original features in C programming.
It would benefit the community if a framework were developed
to assess the correctness of decompilers for a broader range of C
programs.
Further investigations could also explore the correctness of
WASM decompilers for different languages, platforms, or applications, extending the scope of our findings. Assessing our findings’
generalizability across different WASM compilers and decompilers
is crucial to comprehensively understanding correctness challenges.

6.2

Readability and Structural Similarity

We encountered several challenges when delving further into the
readability and structural similarity. Distinguishing whether an issue lies within the scope of the “WASM decompiler” or is a broader
“WASM” or “decompiler” problem posed a difficulty. For example,
the inherent design of WASM as a stack-based machine lacks concepts of arrays. Consequently, a straightforward comparison between the decompiled code and native binaries becomes problematic due to their structural differences. Devising fair evaluation
methods to handle such disparities and identifying the appropriate
properties for comparison is a compelling direction.

6.3

Benchmark and Evaluation Metrics

We conducted the experiments by treating the compile and decompile process as black-box, i.e., we naively compile C programs
into WASM, decompile WASM binaries, execute them with evaluation metrics, and analyze results. The benchmarks we chose are
commonly used datasets for C programs, which cover different implementations of algorithms for a wide range of usages. Though our
approach is straightforward and unbiased, it may also strive away
from the natural usage of WASM. However, reproducing our approach with real-world WASM programs is difficult as most WASM
programs are closed-source without ground truth for comparing
the decompiled code against. One possible future direction may
be a case-oriented study of the decompilation results for certain
domain-specific usage of WASM, or analyzing the insufficiency
of WASM decompilers from fundamental programming language
aspects.

7

RELATED WORKS

Reverse Engineering. Decompilation reverses the compilation
and transforms the binary code back to high-level code. Since compilation is not a fully reversible process, it is difficult to construct a
decompiler that can decompile an arbitrary executable back into the
high-level code it was compiled from [34]. Reverse engineering can
be used to find bugs, vulnerabilities, and malware, and perform verification, comparison, and multi-platform portability [15]. Besides
the two open-source native binary decompilers Ghidra [40] and
RetDec [24] in the study, we also considered angr [2] and snowman
[56]. However, they can only generate C pseudocode or C programs
containing syntax errors; thus, decompiled programs are not recompilable. Thus, these native decompilers are excluded from the study.
To measure the complexity of decompiled programs, in addition

SecureComm 2024, October 2024, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

to the widely-used Cyclomatic complexity metric [30], previous
decompiler research by Khaled et al. [53] highlighted that complicated goto statements in decompiled C code could be a significant
obstacle for developers to understand the control flow. To improve
readability, they attempted to reduce the number of such statements.
Subsequently, a later work by Eric et al. [47] introduced more code
properties, including the number of casts and dead assignments.
Reverse Engineering on WebAssembly. Wasmdec [52] is an
open-source WebAssembly decompiler. However, it stopped updating in 2018 and didn’t support many new features of WebAssembly
standards. JEB [48] is a commercial decompiler that provides the
WebAssembly decompilation function. [8] implemented a Datalogbased WebAssembly decompiler and found that all generated programs can be decompiled. More than 97% of decompiled programs
are recompilable, while only 70% of the lowest complexity programs
maintained correctness, and when the complexity increased, this
percentage fell below 20%. [6] investigated the viability of applying machine learning techniques, i.e., Neural Machine Translation
(NMT), for decompiling WebAssembly binaries to C source code.
WebAssembly Study. WebAssembly has been used for cryptomining [5, 23, 35], games [5], software libraries [22, 38], computer
vision [41, 57], and encryption [3]. Researchers have analyzed topics
including the presence of WebAssembly in the wild [3], bugs in WebAssembly [44], and the performance of WebAssembly. To analyze
WebAssembly performance, WebAssembly implementations of programs are compared with native or JavaScript counterparts. Haas
et al. [18] compared the performance of WebAssembly to asm.js
and native code. Jangda et al. [21] investigated the slowdown of
WebAssembly compared to native code and found that while optimizations can reduce the program size and execution time, some
limitations arise from the design constraints of WebAssembly itself.
Spies and Mock [49] demonstrated that, on average, WebAssembly
code is smaller and executes faster than equivalent JavaScript code.
Yan et al. [54] compared the performance of WebAssembly with
equivalent JavaScript and noted the effects of compiler optimization techniques, JIT optimization, and different platforms on the
results. Compared with those WebAssembly topics, WebAssembly
decompilers are less studied.

8

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we performed an empirical analysis using a selection of diverse metrics to evaluate the generated code from WASM
decompilers. Our evaluation framework covers multiple perspectives, including correctness, readability, and structural aspects. By
employing these metrics, we have demonstrated their usability in
assessing C-based decompilers and provided valuable insights into
the properties and limitations of current decompiled code. We believe that our findings and the framework we presented will serve as
a useful guide for future researchers in the field. Our work aims to
foster the development of more sophisticated decompilers and contribute to the enhancement of both decompiling and WebAssembly
toolchains.

SecureComm 2024, October 2024, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

REFERENCES
[1] Syrus Akbary. 2023. Wasmer. https://wasmer.io/
[2] Angr. 2023. Angr. https://angr.io/
[3] Nuttapong Attrapadung, Goichiro Hanaoka, Shigeo Mitsunari, Yusuke Sakai,
Kana Shimizu, and Tadanori Teruya. 2018. Efficient two-level homomorphic
encryption in prime-order bilinear groups and a fast implementation in webassembly. In Proceedings of the 2018 on Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security. 685–697.
[4] Josh Auten. 2023. Github - wwwg/wasmdec: WebAssembly to C decompiler.
https://wwwg.github.io/web-wasmdec/
[5] Rick Battagline. 2019. Hands-On Game Development with WebAssembly: Learn
WebAssembly C++ programming by building a retro space game. Packt Publishing
Ltd.
[6] Adam Benali. 2022. An Initial Investigation of Neural Decompilation for WebAssembly.
[7] John Bergbom. 2018. Memory safety: old vulnerabilities become new with WebAssembly. Technical Report. Forcepoint. https://www.forcepoint.com/sites/
default/files/resources/files/report-web-assembly-memory-safety-en.pdf
[8] Love Brandefelt. 2022. Decompilation of WebAssembly using Datalog.
[9] Gengbiao Chen, Zhuo Wang, Ruoyu Zhang, Kan Zhou, Shiqiu Huang, Kangqi
Ni, Zhengwei Qi, Kai Chen, and Haibing Guan. 2010. A Refined Decompiler
to Generate C Code with High Readability. In 2010 17th Working Conference
on Reverse Engineering. IEEE Computer Society, Beverly, MA, 150–154. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/WCRE.2010.24
[10] Clang. 2023. Clang Indexing Library Bindings — libclang 15.0.6 documentation.
https://libclang.readthedocs.io/en/latest/#
[11] Emscripten contributors. [n. d.]. Emscripten documentation. https://emscripten.
org/index.html
[12] WABT developers. 2023. The WebAssembly Binary Toolkit. https://github.com/
WebAssembly/wabt
[13] WABT developers. 2023. WABT Documentation. https://webassembly.github.io/
wabt/doc/wasm-decompile.1.html
[14] WABT developers. 2023. Wasm2c Documentation. https://webassembly.github.
io/wabt/doc/wasm2c.1.html
[15] EelcoVisser. 2023. Why decompilation. http://www.program-transformation.
org/Transform/WhyDecompilation
[16] Dan Gohman. 2023. https://wasmtime.dev/
[17] Robbert Gurdeep Singh and Christophe Scholliers. 2019. WARDuino: A Dynamic
WebAssembly Virtual Machine for Programming Microcontrollers. In Proceedings
of the 16th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Managed Programming Languages and Runtimes (Athens, Greece) (MPLR 2019). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 27–36. https://doi.org/10.1145/3357390.3361029
[18] Andreas Haas, Andreas Rossberg, Derek L. Schuff, Ben L. Titzer, Michael Holman,
Dan Gohman, Luke Wagner, Alon Zakai, and JF Bastien. 2017. Bringing the
web up to speed with WebAssembly. In Proceedings of the 38th ACM SIGPLAN
Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI 2017).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 185–200. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3062341.3062363
[19] Yuko Hara, Hiroyuki Tomiyama, Shinya Honda, and Hiroaki Takada. 2009. Proposal and Quantitative Analysis of the CHStone Benchmark Program Suite for
Practical C-based High-level Synthesis. Journal of Information Processing 17
(2009), 242–254. https://doi.org/10.2197/ipsjjip.17.242
[20] Aaron Hilbig, Daniel Lehmann, and Michael Pradel. 2021. An Empirical Study
of Real-World WebAssembly Binaries: Security, Languages, Use Cases. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021. ACM, Ljubljana Slovenia, 2696–2708.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3442381.3450138
[21] Abhinav Jangda, Bobby Powers, Emery D Berger, and Arjun Guha. 2019. Not So
Fast: Analyzing the Performance of WebAssembly vs. Native Code.. In USENIX
Annual Technical Conference. 107–120.
[22] Hunseop Jeong, Jinwoo Jeong, Sangyong Park, and Kwanghyuk Kim. 2018. WATT:
A novel web-based toolkit to generate WebAssembly-based libraries and applications. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE). IEEE,
1–2.
[23] Radhesh Krishnan Konoth, Emanuele Vineti, Veelasha Moonsamy, Martina
Lindorfer, Christopher Kruegel, Herbert Bos, and Giovanni Vigna. 2018.
Minesweeper: An in-depth look into drive-by cryptocurrency mining and its
defense. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security. 1714–1730.
[24] Jakub Křoustek, Peter Matula, and P Zemek. 2017. Retdec: An open-source
machine-code decompiler. In July 2018.
[25] Chris Lattner and Vikram Adve. 2004. LLVM: A compilation framework for
lifelong program analysis & transformation. In International symposium on code
generation and optimization, 2004. CGO 2004. IEEE, 75–86.
[26] Daniel Lehmann, Johannes Kinder, and Michael Pradel. 2020. Everything old is
new again: Binary security of { WebAssembly } . In 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20). 217–234.

W. Wu et al.

[27] Renju Liu, Luis Garcia, and Mani Srivastava. 2021. Aerogel: Lightweight Access
Control Framework for WebAssembly-Based Bare-Metal IoT Devices. In 2021
IEEE/ACM Symposium on Edge Computing (SEC). Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, New York City, NY, 94–105. https://doi.org/10.1145/3453142.
3491282
[28] Zhibo Liu and Shuai Wang. 2020. How far we have come: Testing decompilation correctness of C decompilers. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGSOFT
International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis. 475–487.
[29] Daniel Marjamäki. [n. d.]. Cppcheck. https://cppcheck.sourceforge.io/
[30] Thomas J McCabe. 1976. A complexity measure. IEEE Transactions on software
Engineering SE-2, 4 (1976), 308–320.
[31] Timothy McCallum. 2019. Diving into Ethereum’s Virtual Machine (EVM):
the future of Ewasm. https://hackernoon.com/diving-into-ethereums-virtualmachine-the-future-of-ewasm-wrk32iy.
[32] Steve McConnell. 2004. Code Complete (2 ed.). Microsoft Press, United States.
[33] Brian McFadden, Tyler Lukasiewicz, Jeff Dileo, and Justin Engler. 2018.
NCC Group Whitepaper Security Chasms of WASM.
Technical Report.
NCC Group. https://i.blackhat.com/us-18/Thu-August-9/us-18-LukasiewiczWebAssembly-A-New-World-of-Native_Exploits-On-The-Web-wp.pdf
[34] Jerome Miecznikowski and Laurie Hendren. 2002. Decompiling Java bytecode:
Problems, traps and Pitfalls. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (2002), 111–127.
https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45937-5_10
[35] Marius Musch, Christian Wressnegger, Martin Johns, and Konrad Rieck. 2019.
Thieves in the Browser: Web-based Cryptojacking in the Wild. In Proceedings of
the 14th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security. 1–10.
[36] Bastian Müller. 2023. W2c2. https://github.com/turbolent/w2c2
[37] Shravan Narayan, Craig Disselkoen, Tal Garfinkel, Nathan Froyd, Eric Rahm,
Sorin Lerner, Hovav Shacham, and Deian Stefan. 2020. Retrofitting Fine Grain
Isolation in the Firefox Renderer. In 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security 20). USENIX Association, Berkeley, CA, 699–716. https://www.usenix.
org/conference/usenixsecurity20/presentation/narayan
[38] Shravan Narayan, Tal Garfinkel, Sorin Lerner, Hovav Shacham, and Deian Stefan.
2019. Gobi: WebAssembly as a practical path to library sandboxing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.02285 (2019).
[39] Vu Nguyen, Sophia Deeds-Rubin, Thomas Tan, and Barry Boehm. 2007. A SLOC
counting standard. In Cocomo ii forum, Vol. 2007. Citeseer, 1–16.
[40] NSA. 2023. Ghidra. https://ghidra-sre.org/
[41] OpenCV. [n. d.]. OpenCV: Build OpenCV.js. https://docs.opencv.org/4.7.0/d4/
da1/tutorial_js_setup.html
[42] Vasile Adrian Bogdan Pop, Arto Niemi, Valentin Manea, Antti Rusanen, and
Jan-Erik Ekberg. 2022. Towards Securely Migrating Webassembly Enclaves. In
Proceedings of the 15th European Workshop on Systems Security (Rennes, France)
(EuroSec ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 43–49.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3517208.3523755
[43] Louis-Noël Pouchet. 2023. PolyBench/C – Homepage of Louis-Noël Pouchet.
https://web.cse.ohio-state.edu/~pouchet.2/software/polybench/
[44] Alan Romano, Xinyue Liu, Yonghwi Kwon, and Weihang Wang. 2021. An empirical study of bugs in webassembly compilers. In 2021 36th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 42–54.
[45] Andreas Rossberg. 2023. Introduction - WebAssembly 2.0 (Draft 2023-03-01).
https://webassembly.github.io/spec/core/intro/introduction.html
[46] Eric Schulte, Jason Ruchti, Matt Noonan, David Ciarletta, and Alexey Loginov.
2018. Evolving exact decompilation. In Workshop on Binary Analysis Research
(BAR). Ithaca, NY.
[47] Eric Schulte, Jason Ruchti, Matt Noonan, David Ciarletta, and Alexey Loginov.
2018. Evolving exact decompilation. In Workshop on Binary Analysis Research
(BAR).
[48] PNF Software. 2023. Webassembly analysis. https://www.pnfsoftware.com/jeb/
manual/webassembly/
[49] Benedikt Spies and Markus Mock. 2021. An Evaluation of WebAssembly in
Non-Web Environments. In 2021 XLVII Latin American Computing Conference
(CLEI). 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1109/CLEI53233.2021.9640153
[50] Luke Wagner. 2017. WebAssembly consensus and end of Browser Preview.
[51] Elaine J Weyuker. 1988. Evaluating software complexity measures. IEEE transactions on Software Engineering 14, 9 (1988), 1357–1365.
[52] Wwwg. 2023. WWWG/wasmdec: WebAssembly to C decompiler. https://github.
com/wwwg/wasmdec
[53] Khaled Yakdan, Sebastian Eschweiler, Elmar Gerhards-Padilla, and Matthew
Smith. 2015. No More Gotos: Decompilation Using Pattern-Independent ControlFlow Structuring and Semantic-Preserving Transformations.. In NDSS. Citeseer.
[54] Yutian Yan, Tengfei Tu, Lijian Zhao, Yuchen Zhou, and Weihang Wang. 2021.
Understanding the performance of webassembly applications. In Proceedings of
the 21st ACM Internet Measurement Conference. 533–549.
[55] Xuejun Yang, Yang Chen, Eric Eide, and John Regehr. 2011. Finding and understanding bugs in C compilers. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGPLAN conference
on Programming language design and implementation. 283–294.
[56] Yegord. 2023. Yegord/snowman: Snowman Decompiler. https://github.com/
yegord/snowman

Is This the Same Code? A Comprehensive Study of Decompilation Techniques for WebAssembly Binaries

[57] Ann Yuan and Marat Dukhan. 2020. Supercharging the TensorFlow.js WebAssembly
backend with SIMD and multi-threading. https://blog.tensorflow.org/2020/09/
supercharging-tensorflowjs-webassembly.html

SecureComm 2024, October 2024, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

[58] Alon Zakai. [n. d.]. WasmBoxC: Simple, Easy, and Fast VM-less Sandboxing.
https://kripken.github.io/blog/wasm/2020/07/27/wasmboxc.html

