Context-Guided Decompilation: A Step Towards Re-executability
Xiaohan Wang

Yuxin Hu

Kevin Leach

Vanderbilt University
Nashville, Tennessee, USA

Vanderbilt University
Nashville, Tennessee, USA

Vanderbilt University
Nashville, Tennessee, USA
kevin.leach@vanderbilt.edu

arXiv:2511.01763v1 [cs.SE] 3 Nov 2025

Abstract
Binary decompilation plays an important role in software security
analysis, reverse engineering, and malware understanding when
source code is unavailable. However, existing decompilation techniques often fail to produce source code that can be successfully
recompiled and re-executed, particularly for optimized binaries.
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have enabled
neural approaches to decompilation, but the generated code is
typically only semantically plausible rather than truly executable,
limiting their practical reliability. These shortcomings arise from
compiler optimizations and the loss of semantic cues in compiled
code, which LLMs struggle to recover without contextual guidance.
To address this challenge, we propose ICL4Decomp, a hybrid decompilation framework that leverages in-context learning (ICL)
to guide LLMs toward generating re-executable source code. We
evaluate ICL4Decomp across multiple datasets, optimization levels, and compilers, demonstrating around 40% improvement in
re-executability over state-of-the-art decompilation methods while
maintaining robustness.

CCS Concepts
• Software and its engineering → Source code generation; •
Information systems → Retrieval tasks and goals.

Keywords
Binary decompilation, Reverse engineering, In-context learning,
Large Language Models, Compiler optimization

1

Introduction

Binary decompilation aims to transform low-level binaries back
into high-level source code and is a core problem in the areas of
program analysis and software engineering [11]. It is critical for
security auditing, vulnerability assessment, and malware reverse
engineering [12, 57], especially when the original source code is
unavailable. However, compilation is a lossy process [55]; it discards
variable types [9], type annotations [58], control-flow constructs,
and other semantic information that are crucial for comprehension
and maintenance of the software. This loss of semantics leads to
challenges when manually or automatically decompiling binaries,
creating variable names like v1 and function names containing
addresses like 0xdeadbeef.
Traditional decompilers (e.g., Hex-Rays [3], Ghidra [4]) rely on
heuristic rules and control-flow analysis to identify source structures like branches and loops. Setting aside the loss of symbols and
other semantics, these decompilation tools can often generate reasonably accurate source code when the input binary is unoptimized.
However, when optimizations have been applied to the input binary,

decompilers frequently generate source code that cannot be compiled, that misunderstands the original developer’s intent, or that
fundamentally changes the semantics of the decompiled program.
For example, optimizations like loop unrolling or register reuse may
destroy structural characteristics, leading to poor decompilation
output. These tools are fundamentally limited in their attempt to
simultaneously solve syntax recovery and semantic reasoning with
fixed rules. Recently, neural network and LLM-based approaches
(e.g., Dire [33], DeGPT [25], LLM4Decompile [49]) learn syntactic
patterns through pre-training and generate readable code. However, these techniques rely on statistical correlations (i.e., between
ground truth human-written source and the generated decompiled
source), and typically do not consider preserving semantics of the
original program, instead focusing on optimizing for metrics like
semantic matching BLEU [42] or ROUGE [37]. Moreover, these
tools do not explicitly consider optimization semantics, leading to
deviations in types, boundary conditions, and control correctness.
Thus, there is a need to address current shortcomings in decompilation techniques, especially with respect to optimized binaries and
the ability to re-compile and re-execute decompiled source.
Given the limitations of existing work, decompilation faces two
critical ongoing challenges: Challenge 1: Recovering Lost Semantics. Because binaries are often stripped of symbols (especially in malware analysis or reverse engineering contexts), rich
semantic information like control flow, variable names, and function names are lost. Existing decompilation techniques rely on a
combination of (a) machine learning (including LLMs), which is
prone to overfitting, data quality, and statistical imbalance, and (b)
formal methods, which do not scale well and create many false
positives or overly-constrained typing judgments. In this paper, we
consider augmenting LLM capabilities with well-grounded understanding of decompilation and optimization rules to improve the
quality of decompiled source. Challenge 2: Recompilability and
Re-executability are second-class. Even when decompilation is
successful and accurately reflects the original program semantics,
existing tools almost never produce decompiled source that can be
re-compiled to a binary, let alone execute successfully. Although decompilation is often considered a one-way process at the moment,
there are many applications where a user may want to re-compile
the decompiled source to binary, including hot-patching [1, 31]
and hardening medical device firmware [2, 5]. In this paper, we
augment LLM-based decompilation tools in two key ways to improve the likelihood that decompiled source can be (a) re-compiled
into a native binary, and (b) correctly execute and match outputs
with the original program using a held-out test suite. By addressing these challenges, our approach advances the state-of-the-art
method in providing comprehensible decompiled source obtained
from compiled software.

Wang et al.

To address the above challenges, we consider a mechanism for
integrating descriptions of rules of transformations applied during
compilation to facilitate working backwards — that is, leveraging
the insight that compilers strictly adhere to semantics-preserving
transformations, we integrate knowledge of these rules into LLMbased decompilation techniques using In-Context Learning (ICL) [15,
54]. ICL is a learning paradigm that enables LLMs to perform new
tasks by conditioning on a few examples or instructions provided
within the same input. Formally, the context refers to the augmented
input supplied to the model during inference, which implicitly
guides its predictions without additional parameter updates. In
this domain, ICL enables conditioning decompilation on concrete
demonstrations that exhibit desired semantic-syntactic correspondence. This technique achieves generation of the decompiled source
that is more likely to re-execute and maintaining logical and structural integrity with respect to the original input binary.
Building upon the ICL paradigm, we propose ICL4Decomp, an
in-context learning framework for decompilation. Our approach
leverages two complementary knowledge sources to guide the
decompilation process. First, context examples consisting of (binary, source) pairs provide structural and semantic knowledge that
demonstrate correct decompilation patterns. Second, optimizationaware rules encode constraints consistent with semantics-preserving
compiler transformations during optimization, helping the model
recognize and reverse common optimization patterns. The decompilation process operates end-to-end: given a target binary function, we construct an informative context by selecting relevant
examples or applicable rules, then condition the language model
on this context to generate the corresponding source code. Our
design combines the flexibility of ICL (which adapts to arbitrary
binary input samples without retraining) with the interpretability
of well-defined compilation transformation and optimization rules,
ultimately providing a grounded decompilation framework that
increases comprehensibility, re-compilability, and re-executability
of decompiled binaries.
We present an evaluation of our approach across multiple datasets
under various optimization levels (O0 to O3) and compilers (GCC
and Clang), evaluating decompilation quality through re-executability
rate, which (heuristically) measures whether the generated source
code compiles and produces semantically-equivalent behavior to
the original binary using a held-out test suite. Our results demonstrate substantial improvements over state-of-the-art baselines,
achieving an average increase of approximately 40% in re-executability
rate. The gains are particularly pronounced at higher optimization
levels, where compiler transformations introduce greater semantic ambiguity and structural complexity. Notably, ICL4Decomp
maintains robust performance across all optimization levels, indicating that our framework effectively handles diverse compilation
transformations. These findings validate that integrating context
examples with optimization-aware knowledge enables more reliable semantic reasoning and syntax recovery, bridging the gap
between binary analysis and executable code generation in practical decompilation scenarios. Together, these results highlight the
potential of in-context learning as a general mechanism for reverseengineering tasks, demonstrating that decompilation can benefit
from contextual, example-driven adaptation.
Our main contributions are as follows.

• We present ICL4Decomp, a novel in-context learning framework for decompilation.
• We demonstrate substantial performance improvements
across multiple benchmarks, optimization levels, and compiler configurations, achieving approximately 40% higher
re-executability rates than state-of-the-art baselines, with
particularly dramatic gains at higher optimization levels.
• We validate the robustness of our approach and conduct
ablation studies to demonstrate its viability.

2

Background

In this work, we formalize in-context decompilation as the task of
recovering high-level source code from assembly functions under
contextual guidance. In this section, we introduce define the decompilation objective and notation, then describe the formal setting of
in-context learning used in our framework.

2.1

Problem Definition

Given a compiled assembly function 𝐴 ∈ A, the goal of decompilation is to recover a corresponding high-level source implementation 𝑆ˆ𝑡 ∈ S that reproduces the same program behavior
when recompiled. Formally, the recovered source must satisfy:
ˆ ⇒ 𝑆ˆ ≈ 𝑆 orig,, where 𝑆 orig denotes the original
Decompiler(𝐴)
source code, and ≈ represents semantic equivalence of observable behavior. Our objective is to decompile source code that is
re-executable, which entails reconstruction of syntactically valid
and behaviorally identical source code.

2.2

In Context learning for Decompilation

Notation. We summarize the key symbols used throughout this
paper. Let A and S denote the sets of assembly functions and
source implementations, respectively. A decompilation corpus D =
(𝐴𝑖 , 𝑆𝑖 )𝑛𝑖=0 provides paired supervision between the two domains.
Each assembly function 𝐴𝑖 is encoded into a dense vector h(𝐴𝑖 ) ∈
R𝑑 via a pretrained encoder h(·). The decompilation model 𝑓𝜃 refers
to a LLMs with frozen parameters 𝜃 , which generates source code
conditioned on the input assembly and optional context C: 𝑆ˆ =
𝑓𝜃 (𝐴, C).
Formal Setting. The in-context decompilation problem is defined
as generating 𝑆ˆ given a target assembly 𝐴 and auxiliary contextual
information C: 𝑆ˆ = 𝑓𝜃 (𝐴, C), where C ∈ {Cret, Copt }. Here Cret
denotes retrieved exemplars from a corpus, while Copt encodes
compiler optimization hints. No model retraining is performed,
adaptation occurs purely through prompt conditioning at inference
time. This formulation treats in-context examples and rule-based
guidance as complementary knowledge sources of decompilation.

3

Approach

We present ICL4Decomp, an approach to improving re-executability
of decompiled source, which consists of two variants:
• ICL4D-R: Retrieved-Exemplar In-Context Decompilation leverages semantically similar (𝐴𝑖 , 𝑆𝑖 ) pairs retrieved
from a large corpus to expose the model to concrete assemblyto-source mappings.

Context-Guided Decompilation: A Step Towards Re-executability

ICL4D-R
Corpus

Context Design

embeddings

Example 1 [ASM,SRC]
Example Retrieval

Example 2 [ASM,SRC]

ICL4D-O
Optimization Flags
Selection
-fomit-frame-pointer
-ftree-ter

Context Design
Flag
Description
Example

Example k [ASM,SRC]

-ftree-coalesce-vars

Binary Search Analysis

Hint

End-to-End Decompilation
Input

General LLMs

Output

Context
ICL4D-R

ICL4D-O

This is the assembly code:

[ASM]

What is the source code?

Figure 1: System overview for in-context decompilation.
• ICL4D-O: Optimization Rule-based In-Context Decompilation augments the prompt with natural-language
descriptions of compiler optimization rules, enabling the
model to reason about non-local transformations that affect
data flow and structure.
Together, these two mechanisms represent our empirical investigations of two complementary forms of in-context learning, forming
the foundation of our in-context decompilation paradigm, as shown
in Figure 1. We discuss each in the following subsections.

3.1

ICL4D-R: Retrieved-Exemplar

The first variant of in-context learning, termed ICL4D-R, constructs prompts using retrieved exemplars—semantically similar
assembly–source pairs (𝐴𝑖 , 𝑆𝑖 ) drawn from a pre-built corpus D,
as shown in Figure 1. The central idea is to expose the language
model to examples that explicitly showing the mapping between
source code and assembly code. Given a target assembly function
𝐴𝑡 , we retrieve a small exemplar set Cret = {(𝐴𝑖 , 𝑆𝑖 )}𝑘𝑖=1 from D
and condition the model on these examples to generate the decompiled source 𝑆ˆ𝑡 = 𝑓𝜃 (𝐴𝑡 , Cret ), where 𝑓𝜃 denotes the pretrained
LLM with frozen parameters. Each exemplar serves as a contextual
demonstration of how similar instruction sequences translate into
compilable source code.
3.1.1 Retrieval Infrastructure. To support retrieval-based in-context
learning, we build a retrieval infrastructure that encodes assembly
functions into a dense embedding space and enables efficient, semantically aware exemplar search. In this subsection, we aim to
present how exemplars are represented and retrieved efficiently.
Corpus Construction and Embedding. To enable effective in-context
learning of binary decompilation, we first need a corpus that provides diverse and representative function pairs for retrieval-based
prompting. We construct the corpus from two widely adopted
sources: Mostly Basic Programming Problems (MBPP) benchmark [7], commonly used for evaluating code generation models,
and ExeBench [6], frequently used in training large code models. This design ensures both popularity and diversity, combining
algorithmic-level codes from MBPP with system-level codes from

ExeBench. Together, these sources yield approximately 105 unique
(𝐴𝑖 , 𝑆𝑖 ) pairs spanning a broad range of programming patterns and
compiler behaviors.
To ensure consistency across compilers and architectures, all
assembly functions are normalized by removing comments and register prefixes (%), inserting uniform whitespace around punctuation,
converting hexadecimal constants to decimal form, and replacing
instruction addresses with symbolic placeholders (e.g., [INST-1]),
following the preprocessing used by a foundation model [27]. Corresponding C source codes are stripped of header inclusions and
reformatted into canonical style. Each pair is further annotated with
a functional category (algorithm, string, io, system, or math) inferred from library headers and API calls, along with auxiliary
attributes such as lines of code and cyclomatic complexity. Exact
duplicates are removed via content hashing.
Each assembly function 𝐴𝑖 is encoded into a vector h(𝐴𝑖 ) ∈ R𝑑
using the encoder component of the pretrained generative foundation model Nova [27], which is specifically designed for assembly
code understanding. Nova is well-suited to our objective due to
two key learning strategies: (i) Functionality Contrastive Learning,
which encourages embeddings of functionally equivalent assembly snippets— e.g., variants compiled from the same source—to be
encoded closer in latent space; and (ii) Optimization Contrastive
Learning, which enforces an orderly embedding geometry across
compiler optimization levels (O0–O3), such that heavily optimized
binaries are positioned progressively farther from their unoptimized
counterparts. Together, these mechanisms enable this encoder to
prioritize functional semantics over surface syntax, which ensures
that exemplars retrieved for decompilation reflect true functional
similarity, thereby improving the executability of the decompiled
source code. We use the mean of all [INST] token embeddings
as the final representation h(𝐴𝑖 ) for each assembly function. All
embeddings are precomputed and indexed using FAISS, enabling
millisecond-scale retrieval during in-context exemplar search.
Similarity-Based Retrieval with Category-Aware Re-ranking. Given
this embedded corpus, we retrieve exemplars for each target function through similarity-based search with category-aware adjustments. For a target assembly function 𝐴𝑡 with embedding h(𝐴𝑡 ),
we compute its similarity to each candidate 𝐴𝑖 in the corpus using
Cross-domain Similarity Local Scaling (CSLS) between h(𝐴𝑡 ), and
h(𝐴𝑖 ), which mitigates the hubness problem, where certain points
become nearest neighbors to disproportionately many queries, common in high-dimensional embedding spaces. To promote semantic
relevance beyond purely structural similarity, we apply a categoryaware re-ranking that multiplies the similarity score by a penalty
factor 𝛼 when the functional categories of 𝐴𝑡 and 𝐴𝑖 do not match,
yielding an adjusted score 𝑠 ′ (𝐴𝑡 , 𝐴𝑖 ). This design balances exploiting known functional similarity with exploring structurally related
but categorically distinct examples. The top-𝑘 pairs (𝐴𝑖 , 𝑆𝑖 ) with
highest adjusted scores are then selected from the indexed corpus to
form the in-context exemplar set: Cret = TopK (𝐴𝑖 ,𝑆𝑖 ) ∈ D 𝑠 ′ (𝐴𝑡 , 𝐴𝑖 ).
3.1.2 Prompt Construction and Inference. The retrieved exemplars
are organized into a structured prompt that alternates between
assembly and source segments, followed by the target assembly
and an explicit translation instruction:

Wang et al.

Table 1: Functional tagging scheme and distribution.
Tag

Criteria

Representative Features

algorithm

Assigned when the code employs STL or common algorithmic utilities.

std::vector,
sort(),
accumulate, pow(), sqrt()

Count

Distribution

2,874

27%

string

String manipulation or usage of stringprocessing libraries.

string.h, strlen, strcmp, regex, substr

2,518

24%

io
system

Input/output operations.

stdio.h, printf, fgets, fwrite, cout

5,115

48%

System interfaces, syscalls, or memory operations.

unistd.h, open, read, mmap, memcpy

366

3.4%

math

Mathematical libraries or functions.

math.h, sin, cos, pow, sqrt, log, exp

1,199

11%

Example Prompt

[Example 1]
Assembly: <A_1>
Source: <S_1>
[Example 2] . . . <A_2, S_2>
[This is the assembly:] <A_t>
What is the source code?

Examples are ordered by decreasing 𝑠 ′ (𝐴𝑡 , 𝐴𝑖 ). This structured
formatting allows the LLM to observe concrete correspondence between instructions and abstractions before attempting generation.
The final prompt P (𝐴𝑡 , Cret ) is passed to the LLM under deterministic decoding settings (temperature = 0.1, top-𝑝 = 0.9). The
model outputs a candidate 𝑆ˆ𝑡 = 𝑓𝜃 (P (𝐴𝑡 , Cret )), which is evaluated
directly for recompilation and correctness. Although no parameter
updates are performed, the retrieved exemplars act as few-shot
supervision signals, enabling implicit adaptation to the compiler
style and optimization level of the target.

Algorithm 1 Retrieved-Exemplar In-Context Decompilation
Require: Target assembly 𝐴𝑡 , encoder h(·), corpus D, exemplar count 𝑘
1: Encode target: h𝑡 ← h(𝐴𝑡 )
2: for all (𝐴𝑖 , 𝑆𝑖 ) in D do
3:
Compute similarity 𝑠𝑖 ← CSLS(h𝑡 , h(𝐴𝑖 ) )
4: end for
5: Apply category-aware penalty
6: Select top-𝑘 exemplars Cret ← TopK(𝑠 ′ )
7: Construct structured prompt P (𝐴𝑡 , Cret )
8: Generate 𝑆ˆ𝑡 ← 𝑓𝜃 (𝐴𝑡 , Cret )
9: return Decompiled source 𝑆ˆ𝑡

This retrieved-exemplar mechanism serves as the foundation of
our broader in-context decompilation framework. The next section
extends the paradigm by incorporating another contextual form.

3.2

ICLD-O: Optimization Rule-based ICL

While retrieved exemplars effectively expose the model to compilerstyle mappings, they assume that instruction–source alignments
remain locally consistent. However, specific compiler optimization
flags often introduce systematic yet non-trivial transformations,
e.g., eliminating stack frames, unrolling loops, or fusing arithmetic
operations, that break these correspondences. These transformations often alter the variable–register mapping so aggressively that

push_back(),

qsort(),

the LLM fails to infer correct data flow, leading to syntactically
valid but semantically incorrect decompilation outputs.
To address this limitation, we introduce ICL4D-O, a rule-based
variant of in-context decompilation that explicitly contextualizes
the model with compiler optimization semantics. Rather than relying solely on retrieval, ICL4D-O augments the prompt with naturallanguage descriptions of the optimization rule(s) applied to the
target binary, helping the LLM reconstruct high-level code consistent with the compiler’s intent.
3.2.1 Optimization Flag Selection. Modern compilers expose hundreds of fine-grained optimization flags (e.g., -ftree-dominator-opts,
-fmerge-constants, -fomit-frame-pointer, -funswitch-loops,
etc.), many of which are interdependent and architecture-specific. It
is therefore impractical—and conceptually noisy—to design prompts
for all available flags. To ensure that our rule-based study focuses
on the most impactful transformations, we empirically identified
which optimization flags are actually active in our corpus.
Specifically, we performed a simple but systematic binary search
analysis over compiler options. Given a random subset of functions
from the corpus, we maintained a candidate list of optimization
flags F extracted from GCC/Clang documentation. For each flag
𝑓 𝑗 ∈ F , we compiled the same source twice—once with 𝑓 𝑗 enabled
and once with it disabled—while keeping all other conditions fixed.
We then compared the resulting assembly outputs token-wise. A
flag is considered active if the two assembly versions differ in
instruction sequence, register allocation, or control-flow structure.
By iteratively bisecting the flag list—grouping related options
and testing subsets—we efficiently determined which flags have a
measurable effect on real compilation outputs within our dataset.
The empirical frequency of activation across sampled corpus functions yielded a ranked list of influential optimizations.
From this analysis, we selected the top five most frequently active
flags: -fomit-frame-pointer, -ftree-ter, fipa-pure-count,
-fcrossjumping, and -ftree-coalesce-vars. These options consistently altered the emitted assembly structure and therefore represent diverse and meaningful compiler transformations for LLMbased decompilation analysis.
This data-driven selection ensures that the rule-based prompts
in ICL4D-O target real, observable compiler behaviors rather than
theoretical or rarely-triggered optimizations, providing a grounded
and practically relevant evaluation.
3.2.2 Rule-based Prompt Design. Each compiler optimization flag is
associated with a rule descriptor 𝑟 𝑗 = (flag, description, example, hint),

Context-Guided Decompilation: A Step Towards Re-executability

which provides three kinds of information: (1) what the optimization does, (2) what assembly patterns it produces, and (3) how to
reason about them during decompilation.
The prompt is then expanded with a short Optimization Context
section that encodes this rule in plain text. Below is an example
-ftree-coalesce-vars (Tree SSA Variable Coalescing):

Experiments were run on a workstation equipped with dual
NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPUs. Unless otherwise specified, generation
used deterministic decoding settings (temperature = 0.1), exemplar count 𝑘 = 5, and category penalty 𝛼 = 0.9. The maximum
token length was capped at 10,000 to accommodate multi-example
prompts with long assembly sequences. The random seed was fixed
to 42 for all experiments to ensure reproducibility.

Example Prompt for -ftree-coalesce-vars

Optimize options instructions
The binary you are decompiling may have been compiled with the GCC/Clang option -ftree-coalesce-vars (Tree SSA Variable Coalescing).
– This optimization merges multiple variables into a single register or
memory location. It identifies variables that are copies of each other
(e.g., int b = a;) or whose lifetimes do not overlap.
– The goal is to eliminate redundant mov instructions and reduce register
pressure, resulting in smaller and faster code.
– As a result, intermediate variables from the source code may be completely absent in the final assembly; the logic is performed directly on
the coalesced register.
Illustrative Source:
int coalesce_example(int x, int y) {
int a = x + 5;
int c = y - 2;
int b = a;
int d = b;
int e = c;
return d + e;
}
Decompilation Hint:
Trace data flow from inputs to the return expression; do not create redundant temporary variables for copies (b, d, e) since they have been
optimized away.
[This is the assembly:] <A_t>
What is the source code?

This additional context informs the LLM that missing temporaries are intentional results of compiler coalescing, not lost semantic information. In practice, the model learns to reconstruct
higher-level expressions that directly operate on canonical variables, yielding cleaner and more faithful decompilation.

4

Datasets

ExeBench. ExeBench is the first machine-learning-scale dataset
of executable C functions collected from GitHub [6]. Its diversity
and size make it representative of real-world C code used in opensource projects. We use the test-real subset, which contains functions with concrete auxiliary definitions that can be compiled and
executed successfully. Each function performs non-trivial operations beyond constant or identity returns, making the subset well
suited for tasks such as I/O-driven synthesis and decompilation.
All functions were compiled with GCC under optimization levels
O0–O3. Assembly code was generated in compile-only mode (-S),
and individual function slices were extracted from emitted .s files
based on symbol boundaries, with function names unified to func0.
In total, this subset contains 1,135 samples.
HumanEval-Decompile. HumanEval-Decompile is adapted from
the HumanEval benchmark [10], a widely used standard for assessing code generation models. The original dataset includes Python
programming problems, each with an implementation and unit tests.
LLM4Decompile [49] translated all reference implementations and
assertions into C/C++, ensuring that each function compiles with
GCC/Clang using only standard C libraries and passes all converted
test cases. This yields 1,312 executable C functions covering a wide
range of algorithmic patterns, forming the HumanEval-Decompile
Dataset. The dataset represents pure algorithmic tasks and complements the system-level nature of ExeBench.

Experimental Setup

This section describes the experimental infrastructure to evaluate
our in-context decompilation framework. We first detail the implementation and model configurations, then introduce the datasets
and characteristics, and specify the evaluation protocol and metrics.

4.1

4.2

We evaluate our methods on two datasets covering both systemlevel and algorithmic domains: ExeBench and HumanEval-Decompile.
Both datasets consist of paired assembly–source examples (𝐴𝑖 , 𝑆𝑖 )
compiled under optimization levels O0–O3, and all samples were
normalized following the procedure described in §3.2.

Distribution and Consistency. Both datasets cover all optimization levels (O0–O3) and share the same normalization pipeline. All
samples were validated by SHA-256 hash comparison to guarantee
disjointness between the retrieval corpus and evaluation datasets
that no function appears in more than one set.

Implementation

Experiments were conducted using pretrained large language models accessed through API endpoints. The primary model used for
generation was DeepSeek-V3.2, while LLM4Decompile [49] served
as a competitive learning-based baseline. The embedding encoder
h(·) was from the Nova-1.3b [27], producing 1024-dimensional representations for normalized assembly sequences. All retrieval and
inference routines were implemented in Python 3.10 with FAISS
for vector search and PyTorch for model interfacing.

Dataset Characteristics. Table 2 summarizes structural statistics
including average lines of code (LOC), cyclomatic complexity, and
basic blocks. ExeBench contains long, complex system-level functions, while HumanEval-Decompile focuses on shorter algorithmic functions with moderate complexity. This diversity supports
robust evaluation across varying code structures and semantic difficulty. All datasets and preprocessing scripts are available in the
accompanying GitHub repository to facilitate full reproducibility.

Wang et al.

Table 2: Evaluation dataset statistics (mean / std) per function.
Evaluation Dataset

#N LOC Cycl. Blocks

13.6
3.4
±16.1 ±15.3
13.3
4.9
HumanEval-Decompile 1312
±8.4 ±3.1
ExeBench

4.3

1135

3.5
±15.3
5.1
±3.0

Evaluation Protocol

We evaluate all models under identical compilation and testing
conditions to ensure fair comparison. Each predicted source function 𝑆ˆ𝑡 is compiled with same compiler in -O0 mode and executed
using the same I/O-based test harness applied to its ground-truth
counterpart 𝑆𝑡 . A test instance is considered successful only if the
compiled binary executes without runtime errors and produces
output identical to 𝑆𝑡 . All experiments adopt a timeout of 5 s per
sample for both compilation and execution.
Baselines. We compare two in-context decompilation variants:
ICL4D-R (retrieval-augmented) and ICL4D-O (rule-guided) against
two learning-based baselines: DeepSeek-V3.2, a general-purpose
large code model evaluated without contextual augmentation, and
LLM4Decompile-End-1.3B [49], a supervised sequence-to-sequence
model trained on large-scale binary–source pairs, as the benchmark
work in learning-based decompilation. Traditional rule-based decompilers such as Ghidra are not included, as their pseudo-code
outputs cannot be consistently recompiled or evaluated under the
same executable test protocol.
Metrics. We report the Executable Success Rate (ESR), defined
as the proportion of functions that compile successfully and pass all
functional tests. This metric jointly captures syntactic correctness
(compilability) and semantic equivalence (functional behavior).

5

Results

We present our experimental results to address the following research questions:
• RQ1: Can we leverage in-context learning to improve the
re-executable rate of decompiled binaries compared to traditional decompilation approaches?
• RQ2: Can in-context learning mitigate specific categories
of decompilation errors?
• RQ3: How robust is in-context guided decompilation across
functions of varying program complexity?
We organize results as follows: Section 5.1 discusses effectiveness
of in-context learning for re-executability, Section 5.2 examines
error mitigation, and Section 5.3 analyzes robustness.

5.1

RQ1: Executability

We begin by evaluating whether in-context guided decompilation
improves the executability of recovered source code. We compare two variants of our approach: ICL4D-R, which leverages
retrieval-based exemplars, and ICL4D-O, which integrates compiler optimization rules into prompts. Both are evaluated against the
strongest available baselines, DeepSeek-V3.2 and LLM4Decompile.

Table 3: Error taxonomy for stderr diagnostics.
Category

Example cause / message

Assert
Syntax
Return
Type
Declaration
Runtime/Link
Other

Assertion failure or output mismatch (assertion failed)
Token or structure error (expected ’;’, unterminated string)
Invalid return or argument count (void value not ignored)
Incompatible or invalid type (invalid conversion)
Missing or conflicting symbol (undefined reference)
Crash or linking error (segmentation fault)
Uncategorized message

ICL4D-R. As shown in Table 4, ICL4D-R consistently achieves
the highest re-executability rate across all compiler optimization
levels (O0–O3) and both datasets. On HumanEval-Decompile, it
reaches 54.3% at O0, outperforming DeepSeek-V3.2 (46.7%) and
LLM4Decompile (26.8%). A similar pattern holds on ExeBench, where
ICL4D-R achieves up to 20% absolute improvement. The consistent advantage across optimization levels indicates that retrievalbased contextual examples help the model generalize to diverse
compiler transformations, yielding both syntactically valid and
semantically faithful reconstructions.
ICL4D-O. The rule-based variant, ICL4D-O, explicitly incorporates compiler optimization flags into the prompt. Since decompilers
tend to fail more frequently under higher optimization levels, we
apply ICL4D-O specifically to these first-round failures from O1–O3
assemblies. Because LLM-based decompilation exhibits inherent
stochasticity—where the same assembly may succeed or fail across
different runs, we adopt a controlled baseline that re-feeds previously failed samples for a second decompilation attempt. As shown
in Table 5, this targeted setting yields selective gains—for instance,
-ftree-coalesce-vars at O2 improves executability to 17.35% on
HumanEval—though overall stability remains limited due to the
rigidity of rule-based prompting.
Despite this, manual inspection reveals that ICL4D-O’s failures
are typically localized and easier to diagnose, rather than causing
widespread semantic corruption. We further analyze this in Section 5.2, where we show that even when executability is comparable,
ICL4D-O tends to generate code that is easier to fix.
Answer to RQ1. In-context learning improves the executability of decompiled code. ICL4D-R achieves the most consistent
and significant gains across datasets and optimization levels.
ICL4D-O is less stable but introduces more structured, repairable errors, a property further examined in RQ2.

5.2

RQ2: Error Mitigation

To answer the question of whether in-context learning can mitigate
specific categories of decompilation errors, we performed a finegrained analysis of both compilation and runtime failures across
datasets and optimization levels. While overall re-executability
captures the aggregate success rate, it does not reveal which kinds
of reasoning errors are corrected by the model. By decomposing
failures into interpretable categories, we can assess how in-context
learning improves structural reconstruction, semantic consistency,
and runtime correctness.
Specifically, we analyzed the stderr output of all failed compilations and executions and mapped each message to error categories
based on compiler diagnostic patterns. This taxonomy enables us to

Context-Guided Decompilation: A Step Towards Re-executability

Table 4: Re-executability rate (%) comparison on HumanEval and ExeBench datasets.
HumanEval-Decompile

Model
DeepSeek-V3.2
LLM4Decompile
ICL4D-R

O0

O1

O2

O3

O0

O1

O2

O3

46.65
26.78
54.27

32.32
11.53
42.38

33.23
13.22
40.24

35.06
11.53
42.07

26.17
15.10
34.39

19.26
12.83
35.68

19.79
13.22
36.16

16.13
11.53
33.74

Table 5: Re-executability rate (%) after applying rule-based
prompts (ICL4D-O) for different optimization options across
two datasets. Values in parentheses indicate baseline performance.
O1 Option
-fomit-frame-pointer
-ftree-ter
-ftree-coalesce-vars
-fipa-pure-count
O2 Option
-fomit-frame-pointer
-ftree-ter
-ftree-coalesce-vars
-fipa-pure-count
-fcrossjumping
O3 Option
-fomit-frame-pointer
-ftree-ter
-ftree-coalesce-vars
-fipa-pure-count
-fcrossjumping

ExeBench

ExeBench (11.18)

HumanEval (14.86)

9.34
8.17
11.67
8.95

15.32
15.77
12.61
11.26

ExeBench (7.48)

HumanEval (15.98)

9.52
7.87
10.63
6.72
7.91

12.41
16.89
17.35
10.50
5.05

ExeBench (3.18)

HumanEval (15.02)

8.18
5.48
10.96
6.40
5.45

14.08
15.49
11.27
7.51
12.21

attribute each failure to a specific phase of the compilation pipeline,
thus revealing which aspects of reasoning are most affected by
in-context learning. The taxonomy is shared across all datasets
(ExeBench and HumanEval-Decompile) and methods (ICL4D-O and
ICL4D-R) to ensure consistency and comparability. Each stderr
message was matched against category-specific regular-expression
patterns, resulting in dominant error labels per sample.
Error Taxonomy. The taxonomy includes seven categories derived from compiler diagnostics, as shown in Table 3. For each
dataset, method, and optimization level, we aggregated the frequency of each error category among all failed cases. This produced
a normalized distribution of compilation and runtime errors, allowing us to compare the baseline model and its in-context learning
variants under a unified framework. Unlike overall success rates,
this breakdown enables us to identify which categories of reasoning
benefit most from contextual guidance.
Quantitative error breakdown. First, to further understand how incontext learning alters the distribution of failures, we visualize the
transitions between error categories from baseline models (General
LLMs) to ICL4D-R, as shown in Figure 2. Each band represents the
proportion of samples transitioning between categories, where the
width encodes the relative frequency of each transition. This view
reveals which types of failures are mitigated or corrected through
contextual guidance, as well as which remain persistent.

For HumanEval-Decompile dataset (Figure 2a), we observe substantial reductions in syntax, runtime/link and declaration errors,
many of which transition into the success category. This indicates
that similar exemplars helps the decompiler better reconstruct
syntactic structure and resolve undefined symbols. For ExeBench
dataset (Figure 2b), the improvements are concentrated in type and
syntax categories, reflecting stronger gains in semantic reasoning.
The proportion of successful cases increases markedly, while most
residual failures are related to subtle . Compared to HumanEval,
ExeBench functions exhibit higher structural complexity, and ICL
provides more stable benefits across such challenging cases. Overall, the Sankey diagrams reveal that in-context learning not only
improves aggregate executability but also reshapes the error distribution. This shift indicates that contextual exemplars primarily
enhance structural and symbolic reasoning, bringing the model
closer to executable correctness.

(a) HumanEval dataset.

(b) ExeBench dataset.

Figure 2: Distribution shift of error categories before and
after applying in-context learning.
HumanEval Results (ICL4D-O). Table 6 reports the relative
frequency (%) of each error category for the baseline (Method A) and
the optimization-aware ICL variant (ICL4D-O, Method B) across
optimization levels O1–O3. Percentages are computed among all
failed cases per optimization level. Arrows (↓/↑) indicate decrease
or increase compared with the baseline; ≈ denotes a change within
±0.5%. As shown in Table 6, ICL4D-O reduces declaration and type
errors while increasing syntax-level issues, indicating that most
failures become localized within statements rather than propagating
through program structure—thus producing more repairable error
patterns.
Qualitative example. We present a qualitative example from the
ExeBench dataset (-O1), comparing the ground-truth implementation with the decompiled outputs produced by three methods,

Wang et al.

Table 6: HumanEval (ICL4D-O) rule-wise error distribution
(%), aggregated over O1–O3. Baseline is averaged across O1–
O3. Arrows (↓/↑/≈) indicate change relative to baseline.

Category

baseline

Syntax
Declaration
Type
Return
Assert
Other

15.3
27.3
6.0
0.7
41.5
9.1

ftre

e
esc

oal

e-c

nst

-co

afip

e
pur

17.2 (↑)
12.3 (↓)
4.6 (↓)
1.1 (≈)
49.6 (↑)
15.3 (↑)

ftre

15.4 (≈)
30.9 (↑)
8.8 (↑)
0.2 (↓)
40.3 (↓)
4.4 (↓)

er

e-t

i
fom

19.8 (↑)
23.3 (↓)
8.1 (↑)
1.6 (↑)
39.0 (↓)
8.1 (↓)

e
am

int

-po

er

t-fr

16.0 (↑)
23.9 (↓)
5.6 (≈)
0.7 (≈)
42.9 (↑)
10.8 (↑)

ing

mp

ju
oss
fcr

25.8 (↑)
16.4 (↓)
8.3 (↑)
0.5 (≈)
33.3 (↓)
15.6 (↑)

Source Code

DeepSeek-V3.2

unsigned int func0(char * string, unsign\
ed int * addr) {
unsigned int pos = 0;
*addr = 0;

void func0(const char * str, int * resul\
t)
{
*result = 0;
char c = *str;
if (c >= '0' && c <= '9') {
*result = 1;
}
}

while (((string[pos] >= '0' && strin\
g[pos] <= '9')) && pos < 9) {
*addr = (*addr * 10) + (string[p\
os++] - '0');
}
}

RQ3: Robustness

return pos;

ICL4Decomp-R

LLM4Decompile-End-1.3B

unsigned int func0(const char * s, unsig\
ned int * u)
{
unsigned int pos = 0;
unsigned int result = 0;
unsigned int c;

int func0(char * s, int * pi) {
unsigned char c;
c = *s - '0';
if (c > 9)
return get(&s);
else {
unsigned char x = 0;
unsigned char c0;
x = 1;
c0 = c;
c &= ~0xff;
c0 <<= 6;
c ^= c0;
*pi = c;
return x;
}
}

*u = 0; // Initialize output to 0
while ((c = (unsigned int)(s[pos] - \
'0')) < 10) {
result = result * 10 + c;
pos++;
}

}

5.3

To assess robustness across program complexity, we stratify functions by cyclomatic complexity and lines of code, as shown in
Figure 4. Our ICL4D-R method consistently outperforms the baseline (a general LLM without contextual guidance) across all bins on
both HumanEval-Decompile (top) and ExeBench (bottom) datasets.
Although performance declines as complexity and code length
increase, the degradation is notably slower for our approach, indicating stronger generalization to structurally and semantically
intricate functions. In particular, the advantage is most pronounced
in the mid-complexity and mid-size ranges (e.g., 5–10 branches or
15–30 lines), suggesting that in-context guidance helps the model
preserve control-flow and data-flow coherence even as program
structure grows more elaborate. We do not evaluate ICL4D-O for
RQ3, as for rule-based prompts, higher program complexity does
not necessarily imply greater difficulty—performance instead depends on whether the provided optimization rule is relevant to the
optimization flags present in the target assembly.

*u = result;
return pos;

Figure 3: Qualitative example: Ground-truth vs. decompilations from three methods.

as shown in Figure 3. The original source code correctly parses
up to nine digit characters from a string, converts them into a
decimal integer stored in *addr, and returns the number of characters processed. The ICL4D-R successfully reconstructs this control
flow and arithmetic structure, including initialization, loop bounds,
and incremental parsing logic. By contrast, DeepSeek-V3.2 degenerates into a single-character digit check and returns a constant
Boolean value, omitting the numeric accumulation and loop entirely. LLM4Decompile-End-1.3B introduces spurious control
flow and bitwise operations (e.g., get(&s), c &= ~0xff), producing
code that is syntactically valid but semantically unrelated to the
intended decimal conversion. Overall, the figure illustrates that
retrieval-augmented prompting (ICL4D-R) better preserves program semantics, while purely generative models often suffer from
control-flow collapse or semantic hallucination.
Answer to RQ2. In-context learning mitigates structural errors in decompilation. ICL4D-R effectively reduces syntax and
declaration failures, improving structural and symbolic consistency, while ICL4D-O produces more localized and repairable
errors.

Figure 4: Re-execution success rate across functions of varying cyclomatic complexity and lines of code for HumanEvalDecompile (top) and ExeBench (bottom).

Answer to RQ3. ICL4D-R demonstrates strong robustness
across program complexity, consistently outperforming the
baseline and maintaining higher re-execution success rates
even as cyclomatic complexity and code length increase.

5.4

Ablation Studies

To verify that the performance improvement originates from semantically relevant retrieval rather than merely increased context
length, we introduce a random retrieval control condition. In this
variant, the retrieved in-context examples are replaced with randomly sampled functions from the same corpus, while keeping the
total context length identical to that of the retrieval-augmented
setting. All other components remain unchanged.
Table 7 reports the re-executability rates across the baseline,
retrieval, and random-retrieval conditions. We expect that random
retrieval will significantly reduce re-execution rates and shift the
error distribution toward syntax and other categories, demonstrating that semantically aligned retrieval contexts provide meaningful
guidance for structure reconstruction and variable recovery.

Context-Guided Decompilation: A Step Towards Re-executability

Table 7: Ablation on random retrieval control. The randomretrieval variant replaces semantically similar examples with
random samples while preserving context length.
HumanEval-Decompile
Model
DeepSeek-V3.2
ICL4D-R
ICL4D-R (Ablation)

O0

O1

O2

O3

46.65
54.27
42.25

32.32
42.38
40.49

33.23
40.24
41.34

35.06
42.07
0.35

O2
19.79
36.16
19.45

O3
16.13
33.74
15.72

ExeBench
Model
DeepSeek-V3.2
ICL4D-R
ICL4D-R (Ablation)

O0
26.17
34.39
25.50

O1
19.26
35.68
21.62

6 Discussion
6.1 Applicability and Cost of ICL4Decomp
Applicability. ICL4Decomp is designed to be model-agnostic as
ICL can be readily adapted to many existing LLM architecture,
including open-source models such as DeepSeek, Qwen, and CodeLlama, as well as commercial models like GPT-4 and Claude. For scenarios involving privacy or code security concerns, ICL4Decomp
can be deployed locally with open-source models to enable offline
decompilation. The framework is fully decoupled at the API layer,
making it facilitating integration into existing analysis platforms
like IDA or Ghidra through plugin interfaces. Because ICL4Decomp
operates entirely at inference time and does not require any model
retraining, it is particularly suitable for environments with limited
resources or cases where the original source code is unavailable. In
practice, our framework can be applied to several binary analysis
tasks, including security auditing, patch analysis, and reverse engineering, while maintaining consistent performance across different
compiler optimization levels.
Cost Analysis. The primary cost of ICL4Decomp arises from APIbased LLM invocations, which include: (a) the assembly code and
retrieved exemplars used to construct the in-context prompt, and
(b) the generated source code output. Since individual functions
are relatively short (typically under 300 tokens), the per-sample
inference cost remains significantly lower than in general-purpose
code generation tasks. For example, when using DeepSeek V3.2 on
the HumanEval-Decompile dataset, the total cost for decompiling
the entire benchmark is approximately $3.
In terms of runtime, ICL4Decomp achieves high throughput
through a multi-worker parallel execution mechanism. By distributing decompilation requests across multiple workers on a single
multi-core workstation, decompiling 1,000 functions requires only
about 15 minutes. This near-linear scalability with respect to the
number of workers makes the framework suitable for large-scale
binary analysis in real-world settings. Overall, ICL4Decomp demonstrates strong portability across models and deployment environments, and its inference cost scales linearly with workload size,
supporting practical use in security and engineering applications.

6.2

Threats to Validity

Internal Validity. LLM inference inherently involves randomness (e.g., due to sampling temperature), which may affect reexecutability. To mitigate this, we fix the random seed to 42 and set
the sampling temperature to 0.1, minimizing stochastic variation
across runs. Although our experiments cover optimization levels
from O0 to O3, the dataset is limited to single-function compilation;
thus, certain global optimization patterns (e.g., link-time optimization) are not included, and the results may be conservative for more
aggressive optimization scenarios.
Our current implementation of ICL4D-O uses a predefined pool
of optimization rules to construct contextual prompts. We intentionally avoid dynamically inferring the active optimization set from
each assembly function, since identifying which compiler flags
were applied is inherently ambiguous and nontrivial—many flags
interact or produce overlapping instruction-level effects. However,
enabling adaptive rule selection based on automatically detected
optimization patterns could further improve contextual relevance,
and represents an interesting avenue for future exploration.
External Validity. Our evaluation is conducted at the function
level, emphasizing syntactic and semantic re-executability of decompiled binaries obtained from single functions. We select two
representative benchmarks (ExeBench and HumanEval-Decompile)
used in other works [16, 17, 22, 49] with distinct characteristics
and report stratified results by structural complexity, including
lines of code, cyclomatic complexity, and basic block count (cf. section 4). While system-level and multi-function programs are not
the primary focus of this study, our framework does not rely on
dataset-specific features; extending it to broader codebases primarily requires adjusting the contextual composition strategy. Nonetheless, our evaluation follows best practices in rigorously evaluating
LLM-based decompilation techniques.

7 Related Work
7.1 Neural Decompilation and Binary-to-Source
Translation
Traditional rule-based decompilers (e.g., Hex-Rays [3], Ghidra [4])
rely on pattern heuristics that often fail under compiler optimizations and aggressive inlining. Neural approaches instead learn correspondences between binary instructions and high-level abstractions
to generate source code that is both functionally equivalent and
compilable to the original binary behavior.
Most neural methods follow the Neural Machine Translation
(NMT) paradigm [48], adapting a sequence-to-sequence model to
map low-level binaries to high-level source code. Early work employs Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [29] to translate binary
code directly into C source code. TraFix [30] combines NMT with
program analysis for better usability. DIRE [33] tokenizes assembly–source pairs but suffers from limited context and sparse vocabularies. Coda [20] targets semantic correctness through an end-toend neural framework but degrades on complex ISAs. More recent
work, including LLM4Decompile [49, 50] and DecompileBench [21],
leverages pretrained LLMs achieving improved fluency but reveals
reliability issues due to uncontrolled generalization.

Wang et al.

Despite notable progress, current neural decompilers still struggle with cross-compiler generalization and semantic consistency [9,
32]. Many models generate syntactically valid code that fails to
recompile or execute equivalently. Reconstruction of high-level
structures, such as loops, branches, and call hierarchies, remains
limited in purely neural approaches, reflecting persistent difficulties in maintaining readability and structural coherence [13, 44, 52].
These limitations motivate the integration of retrieval-based and
compiler-aware contextualization strategies to enhance robustness
and interpretability.

7.2

Large Language Models for Code
Intelligence

LLMs have redefined the landscape of code understanding and
generation [10, 14, 26, 51]. Early transformer-based encoders such
as CodeBERT [18], GraphCodeBERT [23], UniXCoder [24], and
CodeT5 [53] capture bidirectional code semantics and effectively
align program syntax with natural language descriptions. Generative models such as Codex [10], AlphaCode [36], and CodeLlama [43] extend these capabilities through large-scale instruction
tuning, enabling complex synthesis, refactoring, and reasoning
tasks. Execution-aware frameworks including CodeRL [34], SelfRefine [40], and Reflexion [46] further incorporate runtime feedback
to improve the functional correctness of generated code.
General-purpose LLMs such as GPT-4 can assist in reasoning
over disassembly and decompiled code [28]. Concurrent research on
transformer-based binary embeddings enhances control-flow representations and structural understanding [59]. Frameworks such
as ReSym [56] demonstrated the feasibility of combining symbolic
reasoning with pretrained code models. In parallel, source-code
foundation models have been explored as transferable knowledge
bases for binary analysis, showing that code-pretrained LLMs capture low-level semantics applicable to disassembled programs [47].
Empirical evaluations on binary-analysis tasks show that LLM
performance varies substantially across compilers, optimization
levels, and task types [28, 45]. Studies of code-oriented LLMs further document frequent hallucinations that can lead to functional
errors [38]. For stripped binaries, the lack of explicit compiler semantics and symbol information degrades type and variable recovery unless augmented with program-analysis signals [56]. Hybrid
pipelines that pair LLMs with binary encoders or code-foundation
models provide external grounding and improve recovery quality [47]. These findings motivate retrieval-augmented and structureaware prompting to stabilize low-level reasoning and improve reproducibility in binary-to-source workflows [45, 47].

7.3

In-Context Learning for Program Synthesis

In-context learning (ICL) enables LLMs to adapt to new programming tasks without parameter updates by conditioning generation
on exemplar demonstrations [8], showing strong generalization in
few-shot code synthesis and repair [10]. In program synthesis, ICL
facilitates rapid adaptation to unseen codebases, problem styles, or
programming languages using a small number of exemplars [41].
Models such as GPT-3, Codex, and StarCoder demonstrate robust
few-shot capabilities for code generation and completion when
supplied with representative in-context examples [10, 35].

Frameworks such as Self-Edit and InCoder use few-shot exemplars to preserve syntactic correctness and logical consistency during code modification [19, 40]. Recent retrieval-augmented methods
employ semantically similar exemplars drawn from large code corpora to improve synthesis reliability and domain transfer [39]. In
binary-to-source translation, ICL provides a natural way to incorporate compiler- and optimization-specific context by retrieving
representative (assembly, source) exemplars [28, 47].
Empirical analyses show that exemplar similarity—measured via
code embeddings, opcode overlap, or control-flow distance—strongly
affects output fidelity [39, 41]. Integrating retrieval with in-context
prompting thus provides a robust paradigm for cross-optimization
decompilation, combining explicit structural grounding with the
generalization power of pretrained LLMs [45].

8

Conclusion

This paper presents ICL4Decomp, a unified in-context learning
framework for executable decompilation that jointly addresses syntactic recovery and semantic reasoning. It introduces two complementary mechanisms: ICL4D-R, which retrieves assembly–source
exemplars to provide structural priors, and ICL4D-O, which injects optimization semantics through rule-based natural-language
prompts. Together, they enable bidirectional alignment between
syntax and semantics during inference.
Across ExeBench and HumanEval-Decompile, ICL4Decomp improves the re-executability rate by approximately 40% on average,
with particularly strong gains under higher optimization levels
(O1–O3). It effectively reduces syntax and declaration errors, while
maintaining robustness to function complexity and context length.
These results demonstrate that in-context learning offers a practical
and reproducible way to achieve executable consistency without
model retraining.
Future work will explore hybrid context composition between
retrieval and rule-based prompting, automatic inference of compiler
optimization patterns, and broader generalization across compilers and architectures. Overall, ICL4Decomp reveals the potential
of in-context learning to advance decompilation from syntactic
readability toward semantic executability.

Acknowledgments
References
[1] [n. d.]. AMP: Assured Micropatching | DARPA. https://www.darpa.mil/research/
programs/assured-micropatching
[2] 2023. DIGIHEALS | ARPA-H. https://arpa-h.gov/explore-funding/programs/
digiheals
[3] [n. d.]. IDA Pro: Powerful Disassembler, Decompiler & Debugger. https://hexrays.com/ida-pro
[4] National Security Agency 2025. NationalSecurityAgency/Ghidra. National Security Agency. https://github.com/NationalSecurityAgency/ghidra
[5] 2024. UPGRADE | ARPA-H. https://arpa-h.gov/explore-funding/programs/
upgrade
[6] Jordi Armengol-Estapé, Jackson Woodruff, Alexander Brauckmann, José Wesley
De Souza Magalhães, and Michael F. P. O’Boyle. 2022. ExeBench: An ML-Scale
Dataset of Executable C Functions. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGPLAN
International Symposium on Machine Programming. ACM, San Diego CA USA,
50–59. doi:10.1145/3520312.3534867
[7] Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk
Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le,
et al. 2021. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.07732 (2021).

Context-Guided Decompilation: A Step Towards Re-executability

[8] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D. Kaplan,
Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, et al. 2020. Language Models are FewShot Learners. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)
(2020).
[9] Kevin Cao and Kevin Leach. 2023. Revisiting deep learning for variable type
recovery. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 31st International Conference on Program Comprehension (ICPC). IEEE, 275–279.
[10] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de
Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, et al. 2021. Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 (2021).
[11] Cristina Cifuentes and K John Gough. 1995. Decompilation of binary programs.
Software: Practice and Experience 25, 7 (1995), 811–829.
[12] Cristina Cifuentes, Trent Waddington, and Mike Van Emmerik. 2001. Computer
security analysis through decompilation and high-level debugging. In Proceedings
Eighth Working Conference on Reverse Engineering. IEEE, 375–380.
[13] Carlos Eduardo C. Dantas, Adriano M. Rocha, and Marcelo A. Maia. 2023. How
do Developers Improve Code Readability? An Empirical Study of Pull Requests.
In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution
(ICSME). 110–122. doi:10.1109/ICSME58846.2023.00022
[14] Benedetta Donato, Leonardo Mariani, Daniela Micucci, and Oliviero Riganelli.
2025. Studying how configurations impact code generation in llms: The case of
ChatGPT. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.17450 (2025).
[15] Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Jingyuan Ma, Rui Li, Heming
Xia, Jingjing Xu, Zhiyong Wu, Tianyu Liu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Lei Li, and
Zhifang Sui. 2024. A Survey on In-Context Learning. arXiv:2301.00234 [cs]
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2301.00234
[16] Luke Dramko, Claire Le Goues, and Edward J. Schwartz. 2025. Idioms: Neural Decompilation With Joint Code and Type Definition Prediction. arXiv:2502.04536 [cs]
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2502.04536
[17] Yunlong Feng, Bohan Li, Xiaoming Shi, Qingfu Zhu, and Wanxiang Che.
2025. ReF Decompile: Relabeling and Function Call Enhanced Decompile.
arXiv:2502.12221 [cs] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2502.12221
[18] Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xiaocheng Feng, Ming Gong,
Linjun Shou, Bing Qin, Ting Liu, Daxin Jiang, and Ming Zhou. 2020. CodeBERT:
A Pre-Trained Model for Programming and Natural Languages. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.08155 (2020).
[19] Daniel Fried, Kevin Ellis, Maxwell Nye, Edward Chen, and et al. 2023. InCoder: A
Generative Model for Code Infilling and Synthesis. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (TACL) (2023).
[20] Cheng Fu, Huili Chen, Haolan Liu, Xinyun Chen, Yuandong Tian, Farinaz
Koushanfar, and Jishen Zhao. 2019. Coda: An End-to-End Neural Program
Decompiler. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2019), Vol. 32.
Curran Associates, Inc. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/
hash/093b60fd0557804c8ba0cbf1453da22f-Abstract.html
[21] Zeyu Gao, Yuxin Cui, Hao Wang, Siliang Qin, Yuanda Wang, Bolun Zhang, and
Chao Zhang. 2025. DecompileBench: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Evaluating
Decompilers in Real-World Scenarios. arXiv:2505.11340 [cs] doi:10.48550/arXiv.
2505.11340
[22] Dejan Grubisic, Chris Cummins, Volker Seeker, and Hugh Leather. 2024. Compiler
generated feedback for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.14714
(2024).
[23] Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Shuai Lu, Zhangyin Feng, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, and
Ming Zhou. 2021. GraphCodeBERT: Pre-training Code Representations with
Data Flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.08366 (2021).
[24] Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, and Ming Zhou. 2022. UniXCoder: Unified
Cross-Modal Pre-training for Code Representation. Proceedings of the 60th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) (2022).
[25] Peiwei Hu, Ruigang Liang, and Kai Chen. 2024. DeGPT: Optimizing Decompiler
Output with LLM. In Proceedings 2024 Network and Distributed System Security
Symposium (San Diego, CA, USA, 2024). Internet Society. doi:10.14722/ndss.2024.
24401
[26] Tao Huang, Zhihong Sun, Zhi Jin, Ge Li, and Chen Lyu. 2024. Knowledge-aware
code generation with large language models. In Proceedings of the 32nd IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Program Comprehension. 52–63.
[27] Nan Jiang, Chengxiao Wang, Kevin Liu, Xiangzhe Xu, Lin Tan, and Xiangyu
Zhang. 2023. Nova: Generative language models for assembly code with hierarchical attention and contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.13721
(2023).
[28] Xin Jin, Jonathan Larson, Weiwei Yang, and Zhiqiang Lin. 2023. Binary Code Summarization: Benchmarking ChatGPT/GPT-4 and Other Large Language Models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09601 (2023).
[29] Deborah S. Katz, Jason Ruchti, and Eric Schulte. 2018. Using Recurrent Neural Networks for Decompilation. In 2018 IEEE 25th International Conference
on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) (2018-03). 346–356.
doi:10.1109/SANER.2018.8330222
[30] Omer Katz, Yuval Olshaker, Yoav Goldberg, and Eran Yahav. 2019. Towards
Neural Decompilation. arXiv:1905.08325 [cs] doi:10.48550/arXiv.1905.08325

[31] Hyungsub Kim, Muslum Ozgur Ozmen, Z Berkay Celik, Antonio Bianchi, and
Dongyan Xu. 2022. Pgpatch: Policy-guided logic bug patching for robotic vehicles.
In 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 1826–1844.
[32] Jason Kim, Daniel Genkin, and Kevin Leach. 2023. Revisiting lightweight compiler
provenance recovery on ARM binaries. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 31st International
Conference on Program Comprehension (ICPC). IEEE, 292–303.
[33] Jeremy Lacomis, Pengcheng Yin, Edward Schwartz, Miltiadis Allamanis, Claire
Le Goues, Graham Neubig, and Bogdan Vasilescu. 2019. DIRE: A Neural Approach
to Decompiled Identifier Naming. In 2019 34th IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) (San Diego, CA, USA, 2019-11). IEEE,
628–639. doi:10.1109/ASE.2019.00064
[34] Hung Le, Yue Wang, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare Nguyen, Shafiq Joty, and
Steven CH Hoi. 2022. CodeRL: Mastering Code Generation through Pre-trained
Models and Deep Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the 36th Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
[35] Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Loubna Ben Allal, Niklas Muennighoff, and et al.
2023. StarCoder: May the Source Be with You! Transactions on Machine Learning
Research (TMLR) (2023).
[36] Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Chris Cushman, Misha Denil, Tejas D.
Han, Nick Jackson, et al. 2022. Competition-Level Code Generation with AlphaCode. Science 378, 6624 (2022), 1092–1097.
[37] Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries.
In Text summarization branches out. 74–81.
[38] Fan Liu et al. 2024. Exploring and Evaluating Hallucinations in LLM-Powered
Code Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00971 (2024).
[39] Shihan Lu, Yue Wang, Shiqing Li, and Steven C.H. Hoi. 2024. RetrievalAugmented Code Generation: Leveraging In-Context Examples for Improved
Code Synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06714 (2024).
[40] Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Peter Clark. 2023. SelfRefine: Iterative Refinement with Self-Feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17651
(2023).
[41] Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Caiming Xiong, Silvio Savarese, Yingbo
Zhou, et al. 2023. CodeGen2: Lessons for Training LLMs on Programming and
Natural Languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02309 (2023).
[42] Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a
method for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 311–318.
[43] Baptiste Roziere, Loubna Ben Allal, Raymond Li, and et al. 2023. Code Llama:
Open Foundation Models for Code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950 (2023).
[44] Agnia Sergeyuk, Olga Lvova, Sergey Titov, Anastasiia Serova, Farid Bagirov,
Evgeniia Kirillova, and Timofey Bryksin. 2024. Reassessing java code readability
models with a human-centered approach. In Proceedings of the 32nd IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Program Comprehension. 225–235.
[45] Xiuwei Shang, Guoqiang Chen, Shaoyin Cheng, Benlong Wu, Li Hu, Gangyang
Li, Weiming Zhang, and Nenghai Yu. 2025. BinMetric: A Comprehensive Binary
Analysis Benchmark for Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.07360
(2025).
[46] Noah Shinn, Fares Labash, Shreya Gopinath, Aman Madaan, and Niket Tandon.
2023. Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Reinforcement Learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.11366 (2023).
[47] Zian Su, Xiangzhe Xu, Ziyang Huang, Kaiyuan Zhang, and Xiangyu Zhang. 2024.
Source Code Foundation Models are Transferable Binary Analysis Knowledge
Bases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.19581 (2024).
[48] Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014. Sequence to sequence learning
with neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems 27
(2014).
[49] Hanzhuo Tan, Qi Luo, Jing Li, and Yuqun Zhang. 2024. LLM4Decompile: Decompiling Binary Code with Large Language Models. arXiv:2403.05286 [cs]
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2403.05286
[50] Hanzhuo Tan, Xiaolong Tian, Hanrui Qi, Jiaming Liu, Zuchen Gao, Siyi Wang,
Qi Luo, Jing Li, and Yuqun Zhang. 2025. Decompile-Bench: Million-Scale BinarySource Function Pairs for Real-World Binary Decompilation. arXiv:2505.12668 [cs]
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2505.12668
[51] Jacob Trentini, Victor Liu, Yiming Peng, and Ziliang Zong. 2025. Advancing
Large Language Models in Code Generation: Usaco Benchmark and Bug Mitigation Insights. In 2025 IEEE/ACM 33rd International Conference on Program
Comprehension (ICPC). IEEE, 01–12.
[52] Antonio Vitale, Emanuela Guglielmi, Rocco Oliveto, and Simone Scalabrino. 2025.
Personalized Code Readability Assessment: Are We There Yet? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.07870 (2025).
[53] Yue Wang, Weishi Wang, Shafiq Joty, and Steven CH Hoi. 2021. CodeT5: Identifieraware Unified Pre-trained Encoder-Decoder Models for Code Understanding and
Generation. Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP) (2021).
[54] Noam Wies, Yoav Levine, and Amnon Shashua. 2023. The learnability of incontext learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023),
36637–36651.

Wang et al.

[55] Reinhard Wilhelm, Helmut Seidl, and Sebastian Hack. 2013. Compiler design:
syntactic and semantic analysis. Springer Science & Business Media.
[56] Danning Xie, Zhuo Zhang, Nan Jiang, Xiangzhe Xu, Lin Tan, and Xiangyu Zhang.
2024. ReSym: Harnessing LLMs to Recover Variable and Data Structure Symbols
from Stripped Binaries. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security (CCS ’24). –. doi:10.1145/3658644.3670340
[57] Khaled Yakdan, Sergej Dechand, Elmar Gerhards-Padilla, and Matthew Smith.
2016. Helping johnny to analyze malware: A usability-optimized decompiler and
malware analysis user study. In 2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy

(SP). IEEE, 158–177.
[58] Yuwei Yang, Skyler Grandel, Jeremy Lacomis, Edward Schwartz, Bogdan
Vasilescu, Claire Le Goues, and Kevin Leach. 2025. A Human Study of Automatically Generated Decompiler Annotations. In 2025 55th Annual IEEE/IFIP
International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN). IEEE, 129–
142.
[59] W. Zhu. 2023. Binary Code Embedding: A Survey of Representation Learning
for Binary Code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12659 (2023).

