DecompileBench: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Evaluating
Decompilers in Real-World Scenarios
Zeyu Gao1 * , Yuxin Cui1 * , Hao Wang1 * , Siliang Qin2 *
Yuanda Wang3 , Zhang Bolun2 , Chao Zhang1†
1
Tsinghua University 3 Peking University
2
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{gaozy22,yx-cui24,hao-wang20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{qinsiliang,zhangbolun}@iie.ac.cn yuandawang958@stu.pku.edu.cn
chaoz@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

arXiv:2505.11340v1 [cs.SE] 16 May 2025

Decompilers are fundamental tools for critical security tasks, from vulnerability discovery to malware analysis, yet their evaluation
remains fragmented. Existing approaches primarily focus on syntactic correctness through
synthetic micro-benchmarks or subjective human ratings, failing to address real-world
requirements for semantic fidelity and analyst usability. We present DecompileBench,
the first comprehensive framework that enables effective evaluation of decompilers in
reverse engineering workflows through three
key components: real-world function extraction (comprising 23,400 functions from 130
real-world programs), runtime-aware validation, and automated human-centric assessment
using LLM-as-Judge to quantify the effectiveness of decompilers in reverse engineering
workflows. Through a systematic comparison between six industrial-strength decompilers and six recent LLM-powered approaches,
we demonstrate that LLM-based methods surpass commercial tools in code understandability despite 52.2% lower functionality correctness. These findings highlight the potential of
LLM-based approaches to transform humancentric reverse engineering. We open source
DecompileBench1 to provide a framework to
advance research on decompilers and assist security experts in making informed tool selections based on their specific requirements.

1

Introduction

Modern software security fundamentally depends
on understanding binary code. From identifying
critical vulnerabilities in the network infrastructure to analyzing sophisticated malware, security
analysts rely on decompilers to bridge the semantic gap between low-level machine instructions and
human-comprehensible program logic. As a crucial
* Equal contributions
†
1

Corresponding author
https://github.com/Jennieett/DecompileBench

line of defense against evolving cyber threats, these
tools must not only faithfully recover program semantics, but also generate output that facilitates
rapid analysis under real-world time constraints.
Two transformative forces have reshaped the decompilation landscape. First, modern software
has grown increasingly complex and aggressive
compiler optimizations systematically erase highlevel semantics, making decompilation increasingly harder. Second, large language models have
emerged as a disruptive force in decompilation.
Reverse engineers now experiment with generalpurpose models like GPT-4 for reverse engineering tasks (Kwiatkowski; RevEng.AI; Ninja), while
specialized models such as LLM4Decompile (Tan
et al.) and MLM (AscendGrace) focus on neural
decompilation. These LLM-powered approaches
show promise in generating more readable code by
learning high-level programming patterns.
However, these advances bring new challenges.
While LLMs-powered approaches produce visually
coherent code, reverse engineers question whether
these decompilations preserve the semantic behaviors crucial for security analysis. This uncertainty
reveals a critical gap in how we evaluate decompilers for real-world security tasks.
Crisis of Functionality Validation in RealWorld Scenarios. Current decompiler evaluation
approaches suffer from fundamental limitations.
Most rely on artificially constructed programs (Cao
et al.) (e.g., Csmith-generated code (Yang et al.))
that lack the complexity of production software.
When validating these decompilers, symbolic execution methods fail due to path explosion, while
unit tests (Tan et al.; Armengol-Estapé et al.) only
check input-output equivalence, thus ignoring critical behaviors like global state changes, heap manipulation, and exception handling that security
analysts must trace when hunting vulnerabilities.
Deficits of Automated Understandability Assessment. Current methods for evaluating decom-

Table 1: Decompiler Evaluation Benchmark Matrix. Symbol: ¥ (full support),  (partial), q (none).
Research Works

Dimensions

Real-world Binaries
Recompilation
Functionality Validation
Readability Metrics
Optimization Levels
Full Automation
LLM-Based Decompiler

D-Helix
(Zou et al.)

SAILR
(Basque et al.)

LLM4Decompile
(Tan et al.)

ISSTA’20
(Liu and Wang)

SEC’24
(Dramko et al.)

DecGPT
(Wong et al.)

Dewolf
(Enders et al.)

Ours

q


q
q
¥
q


q


¥
¥
q


¥


¥

¥

q


q
q
¥
q


q


¥
q
q


¥

q
¥

q


q

¥
q

q

¥
¥
¥
¥
¥
¥
¥

piler output quality suffer from two key limitations.
Traditional automated metrics like lines of code
(LOC) and variable count (Yang et al.; Cao et al.)
miss crucial semantic properties such as meaningful variable names and logical clarity. Human studies (Enders et al.; Cao et al.; Hu et al.), while providing valuable insights, lack sufficient scale across
diverse compilation settings. This forces practitioners to choose between oversimplified metrics or
expensive expert evaluations, neither suitable for
assessing LLM-based decompilation approaches.
To bridge these existing gaps, we present
DecompileBench, the first comprehensive evaluation framework that holistically integrates multiple
key evaluation dimensions, as summarized in Table 1. Our framework advances the field through
the following innovations.
Reconstructing Validation based on Runtime
Consistency. We resolve the synthetic evaluation
crisis through a dual-pronged approach. By establishing a production-grade assessment pipeline
via the OSS-Fuzz (OSS), one of the largest continuous fuzzing frameworks for open-source software, we obtain 23,400 real-world functions from
130 actively maintained projects. We then validate decompilation correctness not through isolated
unit tests or symbolic traces, but via runtime behavioral consistency during the fuzzing campaign.
Our framework dynamically substitutes original
functions with decompiled versions while instrumenting full-program execution paths and checking functionality correctness by evidencing through
runtime behavioral across the entire binary.
Redefining Understandability with TaskDriven Metrics. To overcome the limitations
of existing readability metrics, we develop a 12dimensional assessment framework grounded in
reverse engineering objectives. We employ LLMas-a-Judge to perform scalable comparisons of decompiler outputs through security-task lenses, such
as Control Flow Clarity and Memory Layout Accu-

racy. This automated approach, validated against
expert ratings with κ=0.778 agreement, not only
ranks decompilers but predicts their effectiveness
for specific aspects in aiding the real-world reverse
engineering tasks for reverse experts.
In summary, our main contributions are:
• Real-World Evaluation Framework. We
develop a decompiler assessment framework
to assess the decompiler from three aspects.
By using real-world binary generation and
runtime validation to overcome synthetic limitations, we provide reports on compiler and
runtime aspects. We also use LLM-as-a-Judge
for scalable decompilation assessment, replacing subjective evaluations and simplistic metrics, to conduct code quality-aspect evaluation
and measure the helpfulness in human-centric
reverse engineering.
• Empirical Security Insights. Our evaluation of 12 decompilers (6 traditional, 2
decompilation-specialized models, and 4
general-purpose LLMs) yields transformative
insights. Our key findings contain Hex-Rays’
36.11% functionality correctness drop under
-O3 optimizations, LLM’s significant readability improvement over Hexrays despite lower
recompilation rates. These findings reshape
our understanding of decompiler capabilities
in security-critical contexts.
• Open-Source Benchmark. We release
DecompileBench to enable systematic decompiler evaluations for future research and help
analysts choose context-appropriate tools.

2

Related Works

2.1

Decompiler Evaluation

Decompilers are crucial in reverse engineering,
converting binary executables into human-readable

high-level source code. This task is challenging
because compilers remove key information during
compilation, such as variable types and control
structures. Decompilers use predefined rules and
heuristics to reconstruct these details (Basque et al.;
Shoshitaishvili et al.), leading to significant performance variability based on their rule implementations. This variability highlights the necessity for
systematic evaluation frameworks to assess decompiler quality, particularly in terms of functionality
correctness and readability.
2.1.1 Functionality Correctness Evaluation
Functionality correctness evaluation aims to verify
whether the decompiled code matches the original program in functionality. Prominent methods
include Equivalence Modulo Inputs (EMI) testing (Liu and Wang), which compares global variable checksums between original and decompiled
code executions. However, EMI relies on Csmithgenerated (Yang et al.) test cases, which may oversimplify real-world complexity. To address this,
Dsmith (Cao et al.) preserves intricate control and
data flows by focusing on runtime-dependent variables, while D-Helix(Zou et al.) leverages realworld binaries from GitHub. Symbolic execution
tools like Diff (Kim et al.), Alive (Lopes et al., b),
Alive2 (Lopes et al., a), and SYMDIFF (Zou et al.)
further enhance correctness verification by analyzing intermediate representations (IR) and mapping
symbolic models. Despite its advantages, symbolic
execution faces challenges such as path explosion,
which can compromise precision.
2.1.2 Readability Assessment
Readability assessment evaluates the clarity and understandability of decompiled code, as the goal is
to produce high-level representations for human understandability. Metrics such as Cyclomatic Complexity, Lines of Code, number of goto statements,
and variable counts are commonly used to assess
control and data flow characteristics (Cao et al.).
Techniques like DREAM’s pattern-independent algorithm (Basque et al.) and RevNG-C’s "Control
Flow Combing" aim to reduce control complexity and eliminate goto statements (Gussoni et al.).
Human evaluation is also crucial. Many studies
involve experienced analysts and online platforms
comparing decompiler outputs based on control
flow structure and code patterns (Yakdan et al.;
Enders et al.; Cao et al.; Dramko et al.; Eom et al.).

2.2

Machine Learning for Decompilation

Machine learning has progressively advanced decompilation, starting with basic RNNs for binaryto-C translation (Katz et al., a) and evolving with
NMT techniques that recover semantic details like
variable names and types (Katz et al., b; Liang
et al.; Hosseini and Dolan-Gavitt). Recent LLMbased frameworks like DecGPT (Wong et al.) and
DeGPT (Lin et al.) employ hybrid methods, including static and dynamic phases, to optimize decompilation. LLM4Decompile (Tan et al.) fine-tunes
LLMs to align decompiled and original code, and
ReSym (Xie et al.) recovers variable semantics using LLMs combined with reasoning systems. Advanced foundation models like GPT (OpenAI) and
DeepSeek (DeepSeek-AI et al.) have demonstrated
an enhanced understanding of decompiled code.
2.3

LLM as a Judge

The recent advancements in large language models
(LLMs) have led to the introduction of the ‘LLMas-a-judge’ concept (Zheng et al.), which utilizes
the capabilities of LLMs to score and rank multiple
candidates (Li et al.). LLMs are capable of evaluating various aspects such as reliability (Cheng
et al.), helpfulness (Lee et al., a), relevance (Lu
et al.), and conducting multi-aspect assessments
across diverse applications (Yu et al.). To perform
pair-wise comparison and provide comprehensive
feedback (Shen et al.) without positional bias, techniques such as CoT-like prompting (Zhu et al.) and
output-swapping (Zheng et al.) are proposed, with
tournament-based methods (Lee et al., b) further
accelerating evaluations.

3

Methodology

To evaluate decompilation in real-world settings,
we use the OSS-Fuzz to construct dataset. We further develop an evaluation framework that comprehensively evaluates the decompiler’s performance
from three aspects cared for by the end users.
3.1

Dataset Construction

The dataset construction stage, shown in Figure 1,
begins with the extraction of source code from
OSS-Fuzz projects (OSS). OSS-Fuzz is a platform
that provides continuous fuzzing for well-known
open-source software. These projects are configured and compiled with Clang’s coverage sanitizer
enabled, producing executable fuzzers and initial
seeds as fuzzing input. By running these fuzzers

Extract

OSS-Fuzz

Compile

Run

Project
Source Code

Binary +
Fuzzer

Covered
Function List

1. Build fuzzer and collect covered functions

Extract

Covered
Function List

Compile
Individual
Function
Source Code

Project
Source Code

Shared
Library (.so)

2. Compile individual function

Decompiler

Pseudo Code

3. Decompile shared library

Figure 1: Overview of dataset construction process.
1. Recompile each function

2. Differential testing with original and recompiled shared library

Pseudo Code

Recompiled
Shared Library

Compile

Shared
Library

Recompiled
Shared Library

Dynamic Linked
Fuzzer

Recompiled Function
Execution Detail

Diff
Runtime-Aspect
Report

3. Decompiler Arena
Eval Instruction Prompt

Stat
Compiler-Aspect
Report

Reference Function
Execution Detail

Run

ELO Calc

A’s Pseudo Code
Function
Code Quality
Source Code
Criteria

LLM

as Reference

Quality
Comparison

Code Quality
-Aspect Report

B’s Pseudo Code

Figure 2: Three-dimensional evaluation framework for decompiler assessment: Successful recompilation rate,
Runtime behavior consistency, and LLM-assessed code quality.

fed with seeds as input, we utilize Clang’s coverage sanitizer to identify functions covered during execution. For each covered function, we use
clang-extract (SUS) to extract its implementation along with all dependencies, such as called
function signatures, and used macro definitions.
This allows us to compile individual functions into
standalone binaries (shared object files, .so). Finally, we decompile the desired function from these
binaries using multiple decompilers to obtain the
decompiled code for further evaluation. We leave
the detailed compile options and decompiler configurations for Section B.
3.2

Evaluation Aspect

Following the decompilation process, we evaluate
the outputs across three aspects, as shown in Figure 2: the compiler aspect, the runtime aspect, and
the code quality aspect. These aspects measure the
re-compilation rate, functionality consistency, and
the readability and practical utility of the decompiled code for reverse engineers.

3.2.1 Compiler-Aspect Report
The usability of decompiled code hinges first and
foremost on its ability to meet compiler requirements, including correct language syntax and typing. To achieve this, we combine the decompiled
code with the previously extracted include directives and attempt to recompile it. The result of
this process is captured in a Compiler-Aspect Report, which quantifies the recompilation success
rate. A high success rate indicates that the decompiler has preserved the essential syntactic structure
and dependencies of the original code, making the
decompiled output both functionally viable and
practically useful.
3.2.2 Runtime-Aspect Report
While successful recompilation ensures syntactic
validity, it does not guarantee that the decompiled
code maintains the original program’s functionality. Previous methods, such as symbolic execution (Cao et al.) and unit testing (Tan et al.), have attempted to verify decompilation accuracy but face
inherent limitations. Symbolic execution struggles

with path explosion in real-world programs, and
unit testing focuses mainly on output equivalence,
often missing complex inter-function dependencies
involving global variables and multi-level pointers.
Our approach introduces an innovative sideeffect consistency paradigm inspired by ducktyping (Doc) in dynamic languages. We propose
that two implementations are functionally equivalent if they produce identical side effects on the
program’s execution environment. Practically, a
decompiled function is likely correct if substituting
it into the original program results in identical execution characteristics across all components. The
implementation details of non-interfering function
substitution are detailed in Section D.
In the evaluation, we operationalize this principle through branch coverage consistency analysis using Clang’s SanitizerCoverage (LLVM) and
leverage OSS-Fuzz’s infrastructure in three critical
phases to conduct the verification:
1. Reference Function Profiling: We substitute
the target function with its original sourcecompiled version (a shared library), and we
execute the modified program with the seed
corpus collected in Section 3.1 as input, but
without entering fuzzing iterations. This process collects full-program branch coverage
through sanitizer instrumentation. This establishes the reference function execution profile
containing ground truth coverage metrics.
2. Decompiled Code Profiling: Following the
same substitution paradigm, we substitute the
target function with its decompiled version
while retaining the same seed corpus, then
perform identical execution to generate the
recompiled function execution profile.
3. Differential Analysis: After obtaining the two
profiles, we compare the reference and recompiled function execution profile to check
whether the decompilation preserves the control flow patterns during the whole binary execution. Here, preserving control flow patterns
requires strict equivalence in execution counts
of conditional statements (if/for/while)
and boolean outcomes distribution for conditional branches (true/false ratios).
Moreover, this validation method can be seamlessly extended by plugging in existing instrumentation framework for finer granularity—additional

comparison on stdout/stderr output, local variables (Fioraldi et al.) and operands in comparison
expression (Aschermann et al.).
3.2.3 Code Quality-Aspect Report
To systematically assess decompiled code quality,
we develop a dual-faceted evaluation framework
focusing on readability (syntactic comprehension)
and helpfulness (semantic reconstruction). We extend prior works (Dramko et al.; Cao et al.) and establish 12 fine-grained evaluation criteria spanning
five readability aspects (e.g., type system consistency), five helpfulness dimensions (e.g., identifier
semantics), and two hybrid criteria affecting both
characteristics detailed in Table 2.
The evaluation process employs Qwen-2.5Coder-32B (Qwen et al.) to conduct aspectgranular comparisons: For each pair of decompilers
(A vs. B), the LLM i) uses the reference function
code as the ground truth, ii) assesses both outputs
against every criterion listed in Table 2, and iii)
selects a winner for each criterion, accompanied
by a detailed justification, output in a predefined
JSON format. These pairwise outcomes are then
used to dynamically compute Elo scores, which
serve as a quantitative representation of each decompiler’s code quality. To balance thoroughness
and efficiency in our evaluation, we introduce a
probability-based sampling strategy (detailed in
Section C) that prioritizes comparisons between
decompilers with similar Elo ratings. This targeted approach increases the density of comparisons among closely ranked models, enabling more
precise discrimination of subtle performance differences while maintaining broad evaluation coverage.

4

Evaluation

Our evaluation encompasses six traditional decompilers, representing both commercial and
open-source solutions for reverse engineering, the
description and decompilation technical details
are presented in Section A. For the emerging
paradigm of LLM-based decompilation, we evaluate both domain-specific and general-purpose
models: LLM4Decompile is tested using its official prompt template, and MLM is assessed
through its public API service. The general models (GPT-4o-mini, GPT-4o, Qwen2.5-Coder-32BInstruct, Claude-3.5-Sonnet, and DeepSeek-V3)
are instructed to refine Hex-Rays outputs using
task-specific guidelines and three illustrative examples as few shots. All LLM evaluations employ generation parameters with a maximum token limit of

Category

Subclass

Explanation

Example

Typecast Correctness
Literal Representation

Redundant/incorrect type casts obscure intent
Non-idiomatic literals hinder understanding

Control Flow Clarity

Complex pointer dereferencing

Decompiler Macros
Return Behavior

Non-standard macros violate conventions
Altered return expressions change logic

exit((long long)"Invalid size")
numeric 2685 instead of string literal “\n”
for (i = a2; a1 != (*((_QWORD *)(i+64)));
i = * ((_QWORD *)(i+64) ))
LOWWORD(v5)
return __readfsqword(0x28u)ˆv3

Helpfulness

Identifier Meaning
Identifier Accuracy
Symbolic Values
Function Correctness
Function Precision

Generic names reduce semantic value
Misleading variable semantics
Hardcoded values reduce clarity
Core functionality recovery failure
Approximate functionality recovery

Using v4 instead of buffer
error_flag vs total_count
8 instead of sizeof(long)
Overly too complex logic to comprehend
MD5 identified as SHA-256 implementation

Readability

Dereference Readability

Opaque pointer arithmetic

Memory Layout

Failed type inference

((_QWORD *)v5 + 8)
(*(void (__stdcall **)(DWORD))
(*(_DWORD *)lpD3DDev_1+68))(pD3DDev_1);

Readability

&

Helpfulness

Table 2: Code Quality Aspects: 12 aspects categorized by readability, helpfulness, and both.

8,192, temperature of 0.7, and top p of 1.0. We use
Clang 18 on Ubuntu 22.04 to compile. We build
our compilation service upon official OSS-Fuzz
with modifications to achieve function substitution
and evaluation metrics collection.
To evaluate whether LLMs can effectively capture human judgments on decompiled code quality,
we employed Cohen’s kappa (κ) to measure the
agreement between LLM and human ratings. We
describe the detail in Section E.
4.1

Compiler- and Runtime-Aspect Analysis

Our evaluation across the compiler aspect and runtime aspect are revealed through two metrics, Recompile Success Rate (RSR) and Coverage Equivalence Rate (CER), as the result shown in Table 3.
Hex-Rays is recognized as the leading traditional decompiler, achieving the highest single
optimization-level RSR of 0.706 at -O0, and excelling in averaged metrics with an RSR of 0.583
and a CER of 0.417. Ghidra ranks second among
traditional tools, establishing itself as the best opensource decompiler. In contrast, dewolf performs
the worst in both metrics, as it is designed to prioritize readability for users.
Among LLM-based decompilation approaches,
GPT-4o shows the highest semantic fidelity with a
CER of 0.346, while GPT-4o-mini closely matches
Hex-Rays’ syntactic recovery capability with an
RSR of 0.582. However, these LLM-enhanced
results still fall short of Hex-Rays’ original metrics, with RSR lower by 0.2-45.3% and CER
lower by 17.2-52.2%. This is because the LLMs
prioritize readability over strict compiler compatibility. General-purpose models outperform
decompilation-specialized models by 69.9-120.8%
in the RSR metric and by 27.3-111.6% in the CER

metric. This performance gap may be due to the
temporal advantage in their development timelines.
The swift advancement of general large language
models, which were released 9-12 months after the
decompilation-specialized models, indicates that
they can exceed the capabilities of specialized models within short technological windows.
Our experiments also reveal some key insights. First, CER generally correlates with
RSR, as runtime validation inherently depends
on successful recompilation. However, exceptions arise-RetDec achieves a higher RSR (0.354)
than MLM (0.319) but a lower correct execution rate (CER) (0.155 vs. 0.200), indicating
RetDec’s prioritization of compilation over functionality. GPT-4o-mini achieves superior RSR
in -O1 to -Os optimizations by employing ad-hoc
adaptations, such as renaming Hex-Rays’ incomplete function calls from xmlSAX2ErrMemory() to
handle_xml_memory_error(). This undefined
function triggers a warning rather than an error during compilation into a shared library. Though this
ensures compilation success, it results in runtime
failures and inferior CER compared to Hex-Rays.
Second, both RSR and CER decline consistently
from -O0 to -O3, with -Os outperforming -O3 and
closely aligning with -O2. This trend highlights
the increasing difficulty of recovering compilercompatible code under aggressive optimization.
Notably, Hex-Rays’ RSR declines by 27.3% across
this spectrum (from 0.706 to 0.513) and fails to
achieve a CER above 50% at -Os. This highlights
the persistent challenges of semantic recovery and
emphasizes the need for significant advancements
in both LLM-augmented and traditional decompilation approaches.

Decompiler

O0

Recompile Success Rate
O1
O2
O3
Os

Avg

O0

Coverage Equivalence Rate
O1
O2
O3
Os

Avg

Angr
Binja
Dewolf
Ghidra
Hex-Rays
Retdec
MLM
LLM4Decompile
Qwen2.5-Coder-32B
Deepseek-V3
GPT-4o-mini
GPT-4o
Claude-3.5-Sonnet∗

0.309
0.274
0.225
0.524
0.706
0.402
0.335
0.285
0.659
0.663
0.658
0.649
0.413

0.232
0.246
0.203
0.421
0.573
0.349
0.321
0.270
0.528
0.539
0.591
0.553
0.339

0.221
0.238
0.213
0.413
0.583
0.354
0.319
0.264
0.542
0.553
0.582
0.559
0.350

0.187
0.167
0.125
0.374
0.523
0.185
0.216
0.192
0.385
0.403
0.296
0.410
0.277

0.153
0.153
0.120
0.294
0.430
0.160
0.205
0.177
0.302
0.328
0.269
0.352
0.224

0.140
0.145
0.117
0.278
0.418
0.155
0.200
0.164
0.296
0.329
0.254
0.346
0.227

0.190
0.229
0.214
0.395
0.558
0.337
0.313
0.257
0.515
0.531
0.559
0.537
0.308

0.181
0.215
0.204
0.377
0.513
0.329
0.311
0.250
0.480
0.492
0.531
0.509
0.329

0.191
0.224
0.222
0.353
0.565
0.355
0.314
0.256
0.526
0.539
0.572
0.548
0.360

0.124
0.137
0.113
0.256
0.392
0.143
0.188
0.153
0.264
0.316
0.231
0.323
0.196

0.116
0.129
0.111
0.241
0.361
0.137
0.191
0.150
0.249
0.283
0.210
0.312
0.196

0.118
0.138
0.118
0.228
0.400
0.149
0.198
0.147
0.281
0.313
0.244
0.334
0.239

Table 3: Recompile success rate and coverage equivalence rate of various decompilers across different compiler
optimization levels. ∗ Tested on a randomly sampled dataset comprising 1/5 dataset due to the high cost.
Decompiler-Specific
Macro Conformance
Control Flow
Return Behavior
Clarity
Correctness
Identifier Name
Meaningfulness
Identifier Name
Correctness

Literal Representation
Correctness

600

1000

1400

1800

Typecast
Correctness
Memory Layout
Accuracy

Minimal
Useless Symbols

Dereference
Overall Function
Readability
Correctness
Overall Functionality
Precision
MLM: 1581
LLM4Decompile: 1426
DeepSeek: 1358
GPT-4o: 1333

Qwen: 1317
GPT-4o-mini: 1275
Hexrays: 1162
Binja: 1156

Dewolf: 1143
Ghidra: 1141
Angr: 1131
Retdec: 1063

Figure 3: Comparison of code quality across twelve
dimensions using Elo scores. The average Elo score
across all dimensions is shown in the bottom legend.
The scores are relative within each dimension, with
higher scores indicating a higher win rate. Note that
absolute scores across different dimensions are not directly comparable.

4.2

Code Quality Analysis

Our automated code quality assessment highlights
some key insights. First, LLM-generated decompiled code consistently surpasses traditional decompilers in quality. This is true for specialized models,
which benefit from training focused on readability, and general-purpose LLMs, which improve
through few-shot guidance on structured code corpora. Second, MLM excels in enhancing readability, achieving an ELo score of 1581 compared to
Hex-Rays’ 1162, particularly excelling in Control
Flow Clarity and Literal Representation Correct-

ness (see Section F.1). However, LLMs sometimes
experience hallucinations during variable inference,
leading to minor semantic inaccuracies that limit
improvements in Identifier Name Correctness and
Typecast Correctness. Third, among traditional decompilers, Hex-Rays scores higher in readability
but faces Macro Conformity issues due to the usage
of nonstandard C macros, while RetDec underperforms across all metrics. Additionally, the ELo
rankings for individual aspects closely match the
overall rankings, indicating that decompilers rarely
excel in some areas while performing poorly in others. This consistency underscores the reliability of
ELo as a comprehensive measure of decompilation
quality.
To validate the ecological validity of our LLMbased assessments, we conducted human evaluations through dual expert annotation. Two independent evaluators assessed 30 randomly selected
samples, achieving an overall Cohen’s kappa coefficient of 0.778. Detailed agreement statistics across
quality dimensions appear in Section F.2.
4.3

From Heuristic to Neural

We evaluate traditional and LLM-based decompilers through recompilation errors, comparing their
strengths and limitations to guide decompiler selection for different use cases.
4.3.1 Semantic Fidelity Tradeoffs
Our empirical study exposes fundamental divergences in semantic preservation between rulebased and neural decompilation paradigms. To
systematically quantify causes of decompilation
errors, we extend the error types from previous
work (Cao et al.) with new types identified in our

static __int64 __fastcall sudoers_initlocale(
char nptr, __int64 v10, float a3
){
const char *s;
char **a2;
s = &nptr;
read-only variable is not assignable
char *v18;
if ( a2 ) {
invalid conversion between
*a2 = v18;
'__m128i’ (2 * 'long long’) 16 bytes
*s = 0;
and
return atof(&nptr);
'unsigned long long’
8 bytes
}
of different size
...
v12 = *(_QWORD *)(v10 + 16);
*(__m128i *)(a2 + 8) = v12;
...
*((_DWORD *)&ses + 4) = a1;
...
__int64 a1;
_archive_clean(a1);
return 0;
}
(a) Hexrays’ Output
#include "sudo_debug.h”

'sudo_debug.h' file not found

static int sudoers_initlocale(
char buffer, int64_t reference_node
) {
too many arguments when
char *buffer_ptr;
calling sudoers_initlocale
char **end_ptr;
char *current_ptr;
buffer_ptr = &buffer;
if (end_ptr) {
*end_ptr = (char *)current_ptr;
*buffer_ptr = '\0';
return atof(buffer);
}
...
previous_node = *(int64_t *)(reference_node + 16);
*(int64_t *)(node_to_insert + 8) = previous_node;
...
no member named 'socket1' in
struct sshsession ses;
'struct sshsession'
ses.socket1 = socket1;
...
archive_t archive;
__archive_clean(archive);
unknown type name 'archive_t'
return 0;
}
(b) GPT-4o’ Output

Figure 4: Output of Hex-Rays and GPT-4o. The error
reports highlight where one decompiler fails and the
other succeeds, demonstrating their pros and cons.

compilation pipeline, culminating in 15 error types
whose empirical distributions across different compilers are statistically profiled in Section G.
Traditional tools demonstrate strict adherence to
low-level accuracy through deterministic pointer
arithmetic (*((_DWORD *)&ses + 4)), yet manifest systematic limitations like type safety violations via unsafe casts (*(__m128i *)(a2 + 8)) or
const qualification breaches during pointer dereferencing, e.g. perform *s = 0 which is declared as
readonly const char* s.
In contrast, LLM-based approaches (GPT4o/MLM) achieve higher AST readability at the
cost of introducing novel failure modes: Hallucinated type constructs (e.g., synthetic undefined archive_t replacing __int64); Speculative
header injections (#include "sudo_debug.h"
which is not in the context); Critical parameter
omission in function ABIs, breaking function invocations by removing seemingly unused parameters
(e.g., float a3), even when such parameters are
critical to runtime compatibility.
The neural paradigm particularly struggles with

pointer arithmetic resolution, as evidenced in
Figure 4 where GPT-4o generates invalid struct
member access (ses.socket1) versus Hex-Rays’
bit-precise implementation. Hybrid approaches
show promise in bridging this gap, as demonstrated by LLM-corrected type casts (*(int64_t
*)(node_to_insert + 8)) and relaxed type constraints (e.g., redefining *buffer_ptr as mutable
char), surpassing traditional tools’ output validity.
4.3.2 Scenario-Driven Tool Choosen
These findings reveal a trade-off between readability and correctness, suggesting the need to combine
LLMs’ contextual flexibility with traditional tools’
rigorous type-checking in practical applications.
For reliability-critical scenarios like performance analysis and debugging, established decompilers such as Hex-Rays and Ghidra remain preferable due to their semantically accurate and dependable outputs, even if they are sometimes less userfriendly. Conversely, in reverse engineering where
quick comprehension is crucial, such as malware
detection, LLM-based decompilers are preferred.
Especially those models fine-tuned for clarity, like
MLM, offer enhanced readability that significantly
aids analysis. Ultimately, the choice of decompilation technique should be guided by the specific
analytical objectives, balancing stringent accuracy
with human interpretability.

5

Conclusion

We present DecompileBench, a comprehensive
decompiler evaluation framework that addresses
real-world assessment challenges through three
key innovations: production-grade datasets from
OSS-Fuzz, runtime behavior validation, and LLMpowered code quality analysis. Our evaluation of
12 decompilers highlights critical trade-offs: traditional tools such as Hex-Rays achieve a 58.3%
average recompilation success rate, whereas LLMbased approaches like MLM excel in code quality, offering superior control flow clarity and more
meaningful identifier naming.
This work establishes new standards for decompiler evaluation in security-critical scenarios and
highlights the need for hybrid approaches combining neural-based decompilers with rule-based
approaches. Our framework enables informed tool
selection for reverse engineers while guiding future
research toward balancing reliability with humancentric readability for reverse engineering.

6

Limitation

6.1

Error Localization

Our analysis evaluates recompilation failures as semantic fidelity indicators for decompilation quality.
While runtime differential coverage metrics detect
functional discrepancies between original and decompiled outputs, opaque dependencies in shared
libraries hinder precise error localization.
6.2

Root-Cause Diagnostic

Our methodology focuses on where decompilers
underperform, but the complexity of decompilation
obscures the why behind these failures, preventing
root-cause analysis. This underscores the need
for further exploration, such as differential testing
of heuristics, to improve the internal mechanisms
of open-source decompilers, as demonstrated by
studies like (Zou et al.).
6.3

LLM-Augmented Reprocessing

To address compilation errors with LLMs, we did
not integrate Clang-extracted dependencies (e.g.,
typedefs, structs, macros, includes) into LLM inputs due to resource constraints. This integration
could enable joint inference of type definitions and

resolution of external calls. Moreover, feeding error information to LLMs and iteratively recompiling their outputs could enhance decompilers. However, due to time constraints, this remains a task for
future work.
6.4

Architecture-Specific Evaluation

The evaluation is restricted to x86-64 architectures,
despite platform-dependent variations in shared library behavior and compiler optimizations. For
example, decompiled functions relying on x8664-specific features like register usage or memory
alignment may fail on ARM architectures.
6.5

Limited Human Validation

While achieving expert-LLM agreement (κ=0.778)
on code quality metrics, the validation is limited to
a small set of cases (n=30) evaluated by only two
annotators. This narrow scope risks overlooking
diverse human perspectives and potential ‘reward
hacking’, where models optimize for evaluation
patterns rather than genuine quality improvements.
Expanding to diverse architectures and a larger annotator pool would enhance the generalizability
and robustness of our findings.

References
OSS-Fuzz.
SUSE/clang-extract.
Jordi Armengol-Estapé, Jackson Woodruff, Alexander
Brauckmann, José Wesley De Souza Magalhães, and
Michael F. P. O’Boyle. ExeBench: An ML-scale
dataset of executable C functions. In Proceedings of
the 6th ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on
Machine Programming, pages 50–59. ACM.
AscendGrace. Machine Language Model: AI Empowerment, Gaining Insight into the Binary World.
Cornelius Aschermann, Sergej Schumilo, Tim Blazytko,
Robert Gawlik, and Thorsten Holz. REDQUEEN:
Fuzzing with Input-to-State Correspondence. In Proceedings 2019 Network and Distributed System Security Symposium. Internet Society.
Zion Leonahenahe Basque, Ati Priya Bajaj, Wil Gibbs,
Jude O’Kain, Derron Miao, Adam Doupé, Yan
Shoshitaishvili, and Ruoyu Wang. Ahoy SAILR!
There is No Need to DREAM of C: A CompilerAware Structuring Algorithm for Binary Decompilation. In 33st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security 24).
Ying Cao, Runze Zhang, Ruigang Liang, and Kai Chen.
Evaluating the Effectiveness of Decompilers. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis, pages
491–502. ACM.
Qinyuan Cheng, Tianxiang Sun, Wenwei Zhang,
Siyin Wang, Xiangyang Liu, Mozhi Zhang, Junliang He, Mianqiu Huang, Zhangyue Yin, Kai
Chen, and Xipeng Qiu. Evaluating Hallucinations
in Chinese Large Language Models. Preprint,
arXiv:2310.03368.
DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang
Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan,
Damai Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Deli Chen,
Dongjie Ji, Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai,
Fuli Luo, Guangbo Hao, Guanting Chen, Guowei
Li, H. Zhang, Han Bao, Hanwei Xu, Haocheng
Wang, Haowei Zhang, Honghui Ding, Huajian Xin,
Huazuo Gao, Hui Li, Hui Qu, J. L. Cai, Jian Liang,
Jianzhong Guo, Jiaqi Ni, Jiashi Li, Jiawei Wang,
Jin Chen, Jingchang Chen, Jingyang Yuan, Junjie
Qiu, Junlong Li, Junxiao Song, Kai Dong, Kai Hu,
Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang, Kuai Yu, Lean
Wang, Lecong Zhang, Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Liang Zhao,
Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, Meng Li, Miaojun Wang,
Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang,
Mingming Li, Ning Tian, Panpan Huang, Peiyi Wang,
Peng Zhang, Qiancheng Wang, Qihao Zhu, Qinyu
Chen, Qiushi Du, R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, Ruiqi Ge,
Ruisong Zhang, Ruizhe Pan, Runji Wang, Runxin
Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Ruyi Chen, S. S. Li, Shanghao
Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shaoqing Wu,
Shengfeng Ye, Shengfeng Ye, Shirong Ma, Shiyu
Wang, Shuang Zhou, Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou,

Shuting Pan, T. Wang, Tao Yun, Tian Pei, Tianyu
Sun, W. L. Xiao, Wangding Zeng, Wanjia Zhao, Wei
An, Wen Liu, Wenfeng Liang, Wenjun Gao, Wenqin
Yu, Wentao Zhang, X. Q. Li, Xiangyue Jin, Xianzu
Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaodong Liu, Xiaohan Wang, Xiaojin Shen, Xiaokang Chen, Xiaokang Zhang, Xiaosha Chen, Xiaotao Nie, Xiaowen Sun, Xiaoxiang
Wang, Xin Cheng, Xin Liu, Xin Xie, Xingchao Liu,
Xingkai Yu, Xinnan Song, Xinxia Shan, Xinyi Zhou,
Xinyu Yang, Xinyuan Li, Xuecheng Su, Xuheng Lin,
Y. K. Li, Y. Q. Wang, Y. X. Wei, Y. X. Zhu, Yang
Zhang, Yanhong Xu, Yanhong Xu, Yanping Huang,
Yao Li, Yao Zhao, Yaofeng Sun, Yaohui Li, Yaohui Wang, Yi Yu, Yi Zheng, Yichao Zhang, Yifan
Shi, Yiliang Xiong, Ying He, Ying Tang, Yishi Piao,
Yisong Wang, Yixuan Tan, Yiyang Ma, Yiyuan Liu,
Yongqiang Guo, Yu Wu, Yuan Ou, Yuchen Zhu, Yuduan Wang, Yue Gong, Yuheng Zou, Yujia He, Yukun
Zha, Yunfan Xiong, Yunxian Ma, Yuting Yan, Yuxiang Luo, Yuxiang You, Yuxuan Liu, Yuyang Zhou,
Z. F. Wu, Z. Z. Ren, Zehui Ren, Zhangli Sha, Zhe
Fu, Zhean Xu, Zhen Huang, Zhen Zhang, Zhenda
Xie, Zhengyan Zhang, Zhewen Hao, Zhibin Gou,
Zhicheng Ma, Zhigang Yan, Zhihong Shao, Zhipeng
Xu, Zhiyu Wu, Zhongyu Zhang, Zhuoshu Li, Zihui
Gu, Zijia Zhu, Zijun Liu, Zilin Li, Ziwei Xie, Ziyang
Song, Ziyi Gao, and Zizheng Pan. DeepSeek-V3
Technical Report. Preprint, arXiv:2412.19437.
Python Doc. Glossary.
Luke Dramko, Jeremy Lacomis, Edward J Schwartz,
Bogdan Vasilescu, and Claire Le Goues. A Taxonomy of C Decompiler Fidelity Issues. In 33rd Usenix
Security Symposium.
Steffen Enders, Eva-Maria C. Behner, Niklas Bergmann,
Mariia Rybalka, Elmar Padilla, Er Xue Hui, Henry
Low, and Nicholas Sim. Dewolf: Improving Decompilation by leveraging User Surveys. In Proceedings
2023 Workshop on Binary Analysis Research.
Haeun Eom, Dohee Kim, Sori Lim, Hyungjoon Koo,
and Sungjae Hwang. R2I: A Relative Readability
Metric for Decompiled Code. 1:18:383–18:405.
Andrea Fioraldi, Daniele Cono D’Elia, and Davide
Balzarotti. The Use of Likely Invariants as Feedback for Fuzzers. pages 2829–2846.
Andrea Gussoni, Alessandro Di Federico, Pietro Fezzardi, and Giovanni Agosta. A Comb for Decompiled C Code. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Asia
Conference on Computer and Communications Security, ASIA CCS ’20, pages 637–651. Association for
Computing Machinery.
Iman Hosseini and Brendan Dolan-Gavitt. Beyond
the C: Retargetable Decompilation using Neural Machine Translation. In Proceedings 2022 Workshop on
Binary Analysis Research.
Peiwei Hu, Ruigang Liang, and Kai Chen. DeGPT: Optimizing Decompiler Output with LLM. In Proceedings 2024 Network and Distributed System Security
Symposium. Internet Society.

Deborah S. Katz, Jason Ruchti, and Eric Schulte. a.
Using recurrent neural networks for decompilation.
In 2018 IEEE 25th International Conference on
Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering
(SANER), pages 346–356. IEEE.
Omer Katz, Yuval Olshaker, Yoav Goldberg, and Eran
Yahav. b. Towards Neural Decompilation. Preprint,
arXiv:1905.08325.
Soomin Kim, Markus Faerevaag, Minkyu Jung, Seungll
Jung, DongYeop Oh, JongHyup Lee, and Sang Kil
Cha. Testing intermediate representations for binary analysis. In 2017 32nd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE), pages 353–364. IEEE.
Ivan Kwiatkowski. JusticeRage/Gepetto.
Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Thomas
Mesnard, Johan Ferret, Kellie Lu, Colton Bishop,
Ethan Hall, Victor Carbune, Abhinav Rastogi, and
Sushant Prakash. a. RLAIF: Scaling Reinforcement
Learning from Human Feedback with AI Feedback.
Preprint, arXiv:2309.00267.
Sangkyu Lee, Sungdong Kim, Ashkan Yousefpour,
Minjoon Seo, Kang Min Yoo, and Youngjae Yu. b.
Aligning Large Language Models by On-Policy SelfJudgment. Preprint, arXiv:2402.11253.
Dawei Li, Bohan Jiang, Liangjie Huang, Alimohammad
Beigi, Chengshuai Zhao, Zhen Tan, Amrita Bhattacharjee, Yuxuan Jiang, Canyu Chen, Tianhao Wu,
Kai Shu, Lu Cheng, and Huan Liu. From Generation to Judgment: Opportunities and Challenges of
LLM-as-a-judge. Preprint, arXiv:2411.16594.
Ruigang Liang, Ying Cao, Peiwei Hu, Jinwen He,
and Kai Chen. Semantics-Recovering Decompilation through Neural Machine Translation. Preprint,
arXiv:2112.15491.

Junyi Lu, Xiaojia Li, Zihan Hua, Lei Yu, Shiqi Cheng,
Li Yang, Fengjun Zhang, and Chun Zuo. DeepCRCEval: Revisiting the Evaluation of Code Review Comment Generation. Preprint, arXiv:2412.18291.
Binary Ninja. Binary Ninja Sidekick: Your AI Reverse
Engineering Assistant.
OpenAI. GPT-4 Technical Report.
Qwen, An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang,
Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li,
Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin,
Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang,
Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang,
Keming Lu, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Mei
Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men,
Runji Lin, Tianhao Li, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren,
Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang,
Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and
Zihan Qiu. Qwen2.5 Technical Report. Preprint,
arXiv:2412.15115.
RevEng.AI. RevEng.AI: Reverse Engineering meets
Artificial Intelligence.
Yanxin Shen, Lun Wang, Chuanqi Shi, Shaoshuai Du,
Yiyi Tao, Yixian Shen, and Hang Zhang. Comparative Analysis of Listwise Reranking with Large Language Models in Limited-Resource Language Contexts. Preprint, arXiv:2412.20061.
Yan Shoshitaishvili, Ruoyu Wang, Christopher Salls,
Nick Stephens, Mario Polino, Audrey Dutcher, John
Grosen, Siji Feng, Christophe Hauser, Christopher
Kruegel, and Giovanni Vigna. (State of) The Art of
War: Offensive Techniques in Binary Analysis.
Hanzhuo Tan, Qi Luo, Jing Li, and Yuqun
Zhang. LLM4Decompile: Decompiling Binary
Code with Large Language Models. Preprint,
arXiv:2403.05286.

Chi-Heng Lin, Shangqian Gao, James Seale Smith, Abhishek Patel, Shikhar Tuli, Yilin Shen, Hongxia Jin,
and Yen-Chang Hsu. MoDeGPT: Modular Decomposition for Large Language Model Compression.
Preprint, arXiv:2408.09632.

Wai Kin Wong, Huaijin Wang, Zongjie Li, Zhibo Liu,
Shuai Wang, Qiyi Tang, Sen Nie, and Shi Wu. Refining Decompiled C Code with Large Language Models. Preprint, arXiv:2310.06530.

Zhibo Liu and Shuai Wang. How far we have come:
Testing decompilation correctness of C decompilers.
In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis,
pages 475–487. ACM.

Danning Xie, Zhuo Zhang, Nan Jiang, Xiangzhe Xu,
Lin Tan, and Xiangyu Zhang. ReSym: Harnessing
LLMs to Recover Variable and Data Structure Symbols from Stripped Binaries.

LLVM. SanitizerCoverage — Clang documentation.
Nuno P. Lopes, Juneyoung Lee, Chung-Kil Hur,
Zhengyang Liu, and John Regehr. a. Alive2:
Bounded translation validation for LLVM. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN International
Conference on Programming Language Design and
Implementation, PLDI 2021, pages 65–79. Association for Computing Machinery.
Nuno P. Lopes, David Menendez, Santosh Nagarakatte,
and John Regehr. b. Provably correct peephole optimizations with alive. 50(6):22–32.

Khaled Yakdan, Sergej Dechand, Elmar GerhardsPadilla, and Matthew Smith. Helping Johnny to Analyze Malware: A Usability-Optimized Decompiler
and Malware Analysis User Study. In 2016 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages 158–
177.
Xuejun Yang, Yang Chen, Eric Eide, and John Regehr.
Finding and understanding bugs in C compilers.
46(6):283–294.

Zhuohao Yu, Chang Gao, Wenjin Yao, Yidong Wang,
Wei Ye, Jindong Wang, Xing Xie, Yue Zhang, and
Shikun Zhang. KIEval: A Knowledge-grounded Interactive Evaluation Framework for Large Language
Models. Preprint, arXiv:2402.15043.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan
Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin,
Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang,
Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Judging
LLM-as-a-judge with MT-Bench and Chatbot Arena.
Preprint, arXiv:2306.05685.

Banghua Zhu, Evan Frick, Tianhao Wu, Hanlin Zhu,
Karthik Ganesan, Wei-Lin Chiang, Jian Zhang, and
Jiantao Jiao. Starling-7B: Improving Helpfulness
and Harmlessness with RLAIF.
Muqi Zou, Arslan Khan, Ruoyu Wu, Han Gao, and
Antonio Bianchi. D-Helix: A Generic Decompiler
Testing Framework Using Symbolic Differentiation.
In The Proceedings of the 33rd USENIX Security
Symposium.

A

Decompiler Details

This appendix provides description and technical
details about each decompiler in our paper:
• Angr: Binary analysis framework utilizing proprietary AIL (angr Intermediate Language) combining symbolic execution with
Value-Set Analysis (VSA). Executes decompilation through angr.Project.Decompiler
class via direct invocation on target functions.
Supports x86, ARM, and MIPS architectures.
• Binary Ninja: Multi-stage decompilation
platform with LLIL/MLIL/HLIL intermediate
representations. Creates decompilation views
via LinearViewObject.single_function_
language_representation(func,
settings), constructing final output
through iterative cursor object traversal.
• Dewolf: Binary Ninja-based decompiler
optimized for human-readable C code.
Initializes decompilation process using
DecompilerPipeline.from_strings()
that ingests control flow graph (CFG) and abstract syntax tree (AST) inputs, subsequently
executing the pipeline for code generation.
• Ghidra:
Enterprise-grade system using
P-Code
intermediate
language.
Invokes
decompilation
through
FlatDecompilerAPI(flat_api)
interface
followed
by
explicit
decomp_api.decompile(function) calls
in the API execution chain.
• Hex-Rays: Industry-standard decompiler implementing ida_hexrays.decompile(func)
for single-step decompilation within IDA
Pro’s interactive environment.
Features
production-grade quality through mature pattern recognition.
• RetDec: LLVM-based decompilation framework using multi-pass optimization. Executes
standalone retdec-decompiler executable
(located in installation directory) directly on
target binaries to initiate the decompilation
process.

B

Compilation and Decompilation Detail

When compiling fuzzer and executable, we append
-Wl,–export-dynamic to compile commands, enabling shared library to resolve symbols in the

executable in function substitution 3.2.2. When
compiling target functions into shared libraries, we
add -fno-inline to prevent function inlining that
would obstruct individual function extraction from
the binary. After obtaining the decompiled code,
we identify common error patterns for each decompiler and conduct general post-processing corrections. For example, in Binary Ninja, we remove
patterns such as @ zmm02 and __pure3 that could
absolutely cause compilabtion errors.

C

Sampling Strategy in LLM-as-a-Judge

Initially, for each binary in our dataset, we randomly select the output of one decompiler. Subsequently, we calculate the probability of selecting another decompiler (model b) for comparison, based
on their ELo scores. Let Ra and Rb represent the
ELo scores of models a and b, respectively. The selection probability P (b) for model b is determined
as follows:
P (b) =

1
a −Rb |
1 + min|R
|Ra −Ri |+ϵ

(1)

i

where ϵ is a small constant (1e-6) to avoid division by zero, and Ri represents the rating of any
model i in the candidate pool. The final normalized
probability is:
P (b)
Pnorm (b) = P
P (j)

(2)

j

This approach effectively prioritizes the evaluation of more comparable decompiler outputs while
still maintaining comprehensive coverage. Formally, the selection probability P (di ) for decompiler di is proportional to the proximity of its ELo
score to the reference.

D

Function Substitution Implementation
Details

In this section, we elaborate on the technical implementation of our function substitution mechanism,
i.e. substituting the decompiled function into the
original program without influence any other function (including the virtual address), comprising two
critical phases: compile-time preparation and runtime redirection.
2
3

use zmm0 register to store the function argument
Binary Ninja-specific function attribution

//headers
#define bool_test bool
/** clang-extract: from test.h

*/

bool_test test(int input);
// target function
static bool_test function_test(int a)
{
result = test(a);

D.2.1 Function Prologue Patching
We locate the function to be substituted in the executable and we replace the function prologue, the
initial set of instructions in an function, with custom machine code shown in 5 that redirects execution to an address hold by a memory-mapped fixed
location, 0xbabe0000.

return result;
}
__attribute__((constructor)) void initializer()
{
void **address = (void **)syscall(
MMAP, (void*)0xbabe0000, 4096,
PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE,
MAP_PRIVATE | MAP_ANONYMOUS | MAP_FIXED,

xor rax, rax;
mov eax, 0xbabe0000;
mov rax, [rax];
jmp rax;

Figure 5: Function prologue patching to redirect execution to a fixed memory-mapped location.

-1, 0
);
if (address == MAP_FAILED)
syscall(EXIT, 1);
*(void **)(0xbabe0000) = function_test;
}
__attribute__((destructor)) void finalizer()
{
syscall(MUNMAP, (void *)0xbabe0000, 4096);
}

Figure 6: Generating a complete compilable C test file:
adding necessary headers initializer and finalizer around
the target function ‘function_test’.

D.1

Compile-Time Preparation

To establish control over the executable’s dynamic
linking process, we modify the fuzzer compilation commands to force the compilation links
against a specially crafted dummy shared library
(dummy.so). This shared library contains a mandatory entry point for OSS-Fuzz’s execution framework, LLVMFuzzerTestOneInput. This ensures
our dummy library gets loaded through dynamic
linking. The dummy shared library contains no
operational logic, serving only as a placeholder to
inject our instrumentation later. The compilation
command modification preserves symbol visibility
for subsequent dynamic function calling by adding
-Wl,–export-dynamic in the compilabtion commands.
D.2

Runtime Redirection

During actual execution, we replace the dummy implementation with our instrumented target function
through the following coordinated steps.

D.2.2 Address Binding
We insert two auxiliary functions, an initializer
and a finalizer, into the shared object. The initializer function is called when the shared object is
loaded, and the finalizer is called when the shared
object is unloaded. The initializer function stores
the address of the target into a fixed global address
(0xbabe0000) to facilitate later runtime redirection.
And the finalizer is responsible for cleaning up. We
show the code snippet in Figure 6.
D.2.3 Resolving External Function Calls
A notable characteristic of real-world programs
is that functions rarely operate in isolation; most
invoke other functions within the project. When
testing the compilation success rate and functionality correctness of individual decompiled functions, we must include declarations of all external
functions as the context. Ideally, during execution,
these external functions should use their original
implementations in the binary.
When we take a function that has been decompiled and compiled back into a shared object (.so),
and then try to use this .so alongside the original
binary, we encounter a specific issue. If the function in our .so calls another function, say b, which
exists and is implemented only within the original
binary, and that binary has not made b available
for dynamic linking (meaning b is not listed in the
binary’s dynamic symbol table, dynsym), then the
.so file will contain a reference to b but no implementation.
During execution, when the code in the .so attempts to call b, the dynamic linker tries to find
b’s implementation. Because b is not visible in
the binary’s dynamic symbols, the linker fails to

resolve the symbol, resulting in a runtime error, typically a "symbol lookup error: ‘b’". This problem
arises because the binary’s internal functions are
not fully exposed for dynamic linking, and since
we are working only with the compiled binary, we
cannot alter its compilation settings to change this.
To resolve this, we need to ensure that calls from
the .so to functions implemented in the binary are
correctly directed. This process effectively involves
manually performing some of the relocation tasks
that the dynamic linker (ld) would typically handle.
Before execution, we collect specific addresses for
relevant functions in both the binary and the .so.
• For functions implemented within the binary:
We determine the address where the function’s
actual code resides. This is the address associated with the function’s symbol.
• For calls made from the .so to external functions (like those in the binary): We identify
the address within the .so’s .got.plt section
that corresponds to the symbol of the function
being called. This .got.plt entry is the point
within the .so that needs to be adjusted to
correctly call the external function.
By obtaining these addresses, along with the runtime base addresses of the binary and the .so, we
can calculate the final runtime addresses and redirect the external calls within the .so to point directly to the implementations within the binary.

E

Cohen’s Kappa

Cohen’s kappa measures the agreement between
two raters classifying N items into C mutually
exclusive categories, defined as:
κ≡

1 − po
po − pe
=1−
1 − pe
1 − pe

(3)

where po represents the relative observed agreement between raters, and pe represents the hypothetical probability of chance agreement. For k
categories and N observations, with nki representing the number of times rater i predicted category
k, pe is calculated as:
C

1 X
pe = 2
nk1 nk2
N

(4)

k=1

This calculation of pe is derived from the assumption that ratings are independent, where the
probability of each rater classifying an item as category k is estimated by the proportion of items they

nk1
assigned to that category: pc
k1 = N (and similarly
for rater 2).
C

po =

1 X
nkk
N

(5)

k=1

The observed agreement po is calculated using
nkk , which counts items assignegned to category
k by both raters. The coefficient ranges from -1 to
1, where κ = 1 indicates perfect agreement, κ =
0 suggests agreement no better than chance, and
negative values indicate systematic disagreement.

F

Code Quality

F.1

Case Study

As illustrated in Figure 7, MLM markedly improves control flow clarity by accurately recovering switch statements and assigning semantically meaningful labels to conditional branches.
In addition, it enhances code readability through
sophisticated pointer dereference resolution, effectively transforming low-level constructs such as
*((_DWORD *)ptr + 2) = a1 into more humanreadable forms like leak->type = type, a feature
that is also partially achieved by DeepSeek.
F.2

Agreement Analysis

Table 4 demonstrates significant agreement between LLM and human evaluators across these aspects: Non-idiomatic Literal Representation (κ =
0.905), Non-idiomatic Dereferencing (κ = 0.866),
and Expanded Symbols (κ = 0.917). However,
notable discrepancies emerged in other areas, primarily due to ambiguous evaluation criteria:
• Meaningless Identifiers (κ = 0.530): The
LLM occasionally provides judgments contrary to the established rules, penalizing meaningful names by labeling code with genuinely
meaningful variable names as "loser." This discrepancy likely stems from misapplied evaluation criteria.
• Incorrect Identifiers (κ = 0.656): The LLM
tends to classify variable names with slight
semantic deviations as incorrect, while overlooking entirely meaningless names. In contrast, human annotators focus on significant
semantic deviations from the source code variable names, considering only misleading identifiers as incorrect. This divergence highlights
the LLM’s limited capability in assessing the
misleading nature of identifiers.

switch (a1) {
case 1u:
ptr[2] = a2;
goto LABEL_14;
case 2u:
ptr[2] = a2;
goto LABEL_14;
case 3u:
ptr[2] = a2;
goto LABEL_14;
case 4u:
ptr[2] = a2;
goto LABEL_14;
case 5u:
ptr[2] = a2;
goto LABEL_14;
case 6u:
ptr[2] = a2;
LABEL_14:
*((_DWORD *)ptr + 2) = a1;
*ptr = parser_leak_list;
parser_leak_list = (__int64)ptr;
result = 1LL;
break;
default:
free(ptr);
sudo_warnx_nodebug_v1("unexpected
leak type %d", a1);
result = 0LL;
break;
}

switch (type) {
case PARSER_LEAK_ALIAS:
leak->ptr = ptr;
break;
case PARSER_LEAK_ALIAS_LIST:
leak->ptr = ptr;
break;
case PARSER_LEAK_DEFAULTS:
leak->ptr = ptr;
break;
case PARSER_LEAK_DEFAULTS_LIST:
leak->ptr = ptr;
break;
case PARSER_LEAK_HOSTALIAS:
leak->ptr = ptr;
break;
case PARSER_LEAK_HOSTALIAS_LIST:
leak->ptr = ptr;
break;
case PARSER_LEAK_RUNAS:
leak->ptr = ptr;
break;
default:
free(leak);
sudo_warnx_nodebug("unexpected
leak type %d", type);
return false;
}
leak->type = type;
leak->next = parser_leak_list;
parser_leak_list = leak;
return true;

(a) Hexrays’s decompiled code

(b) MLM’s decompiled code

switch (leak_type) {
case 1:
case 2:
case 3:
case 4:
case 5:
case 6:
new_entry[2] = leak_data;
((unsigned int *)new_entry)[2] = leak_type;
new_entry[0] = parser_leak_list;
parser_leak_list = new_entry;
return 1;
default:
free(new_entry);
sudo_warnx_nodebug_v1("unexpected leak type %d", leak_type);
return 0; }
(c) GPT-4o’s decompiled code
switch (leak_type) {
case 1:
case 2:
case 3:
case 4:
case 5:
case 6:
entry->data = leak_data;
entry->type = leak_type;
entry->next = parser_leak_list;
parser_leak_list = entry;
return 1;
default:
free(entry);
sudo_warnx_nodebug_v1("unexpected leak type %d", leak_type);
return 0; }
(d) DeepSeek’s decompiled code

Figure 7: Cases related to the code quality of Hexrays, MLM, GPT-4o, and DeepSeek.
Issue Type
Typecast Correctness
Literal Representation Correctness
Control Flow Clarity
Decompiler-Specific Macros
Return Behavior Correctness
Identifier Name Meaningfulness
Identifier Name Correctness
Minimal Useless Symbols
Overall Function Correctness
Overall Functionality Precision
Dereference Readability
Memory Layout Accuracy

κ

Complete agreement

0.868
0.905
0.826
0.704
0.776
0.530
0.656
0.917
0.809
0.769
0.866
0.727

0.933
0.97
0.933
0.87
0.00900
0.77
0.833
0.97
0.00900
0.00900
0.999
0.87

Table 4: LLM-Rater agreement results.

• Memory Layout Abuse (κ = 0.727): The
LLM adopts a stricter evaluation approach
compared to the more lenient human assessments. As a result, code deemed acceptable
by humans may be flagged by the LLM as
exhibiting Memory Layout Abuse.

G

Error Analysis

Our comprehensive evaluation scrutinizes compilestage errors across decompilers. While previous
studies (Zou et al.; Eom et al.; Cao et al.) identified multiple fundamental error types based on
errors observed during the recompile phase of traditional decompilers, our analysis of LLM-based
decompilers necessitated a revised taxonomy that
accounts for novel error categories and their dis-

tribution. Building upon prior work, we introduce
additional error types—such as control flow issues,
memory issues, file and resource issues, and type
conversion/compatibility errors—thereby establishing a phase-aware framework that delineates 15
distinct error types. Besides, category A focuses on
Assembly Issues, dealing with errors related to interpreting and converting assembly code. Category
B addresses Variable and Memory Issues, including problems with variable declarations, memory
management, and type conversions. Category C
highlights Function and Control Flow Issues, which
involve errors in function resolution, control flow,
and handling of user-defined types. Category D
deals with Syntax and Macro Issues, which include
errors related to syntax, expressions, and preprocessor macros during the translation process. This
refined classification provides a comprehensive basis for understanding and addressing the challenges
inherent in the decompilation process.
Traditional decompilers exhibit a mix of
strengths and weaknesses across error categories.
Hex-Rays excels in precise control flow recovery with zero Control Flow Issues (X), in Figure
8, ensuring that the output accurately reflects the
original logic without introducing execution errors.
While Angr overuses unstructured jumps (goto),
resulting in 255 errors. Binja, though generally
effective in structuring control flow, occasionally
merges unrelated branches, leading to ambiguity.

Error
Category

Error

Angr

Binja

Traditional Decompiler
Dewolf Ghidra Hexrays

Retdec

Decompilation-specialized LLMs
MLM
LLM4Decompile

Qwen2.5

General LLM
Deepseek-V3 GPT-4o-mini

GPT-4o

A

Assembly Issues (I)
File and Resource Issues (II)

335
-

118
-

331
-

12
-

27
-

29
-

173
-

204
-

430
17

165
-

167
32

154
33

B

Variable Declaration/Naming (III)
Memory Issues (IV)
Type Conversion/Compatibility (V)
Initialization Issues (VI)

822
43
1079
-

886
23
2006
-

863
1229
219

4414
486
-

2237
12
875
-

6508
1066
-

3289
6
126
71

2325
10
77
122

2487
29
622
103

1956
13
876
89

2854
14
663
83

2538
9
655
87

C

Function Declaration/Invocation (VII)
User-Defined Type Issues (VIII)
Dependency/Redefinition (IX)
Control Flow Issues (X)

4863
665
2938
255

2626
475
1842
607

3008
336
2103
56

4417
279
1492
76

3470
209
1970
-

3483
321
1761
304

1457
2339
188
44

1655
3038
160
85

4254
483
2138
45

3862
824
1837
28

3411
347
2081
32

3220
294
2056
21

D

Target Platform/Config (XI)
Type Definition/Resolution (XII)
Expression/Operator (XIII)
Syntax Errors (XIV)
Macro/Preprocessor (XV)

1200
5601
2484
7

12
1912
7264
432
4

16
2108
9898
1233
2

22
527
800
855
5

10
16
267
103
6

27
96
348
238
8

7705
472
109
1

10066
563
314
7

12
692
827
171
7

14
890
635
36
-

11
528
787
91
1

12
488
536
225
6

Table 5: Comparison of Error Types Across Traditional Decompilers, LLM Decompilers, and General LLMs

In Expression/Operator Handling (XIII), Hex-Rays
(267) and RetDec (348) outperform others by accurately recovering complex bitwise operations, such
as sign extension and masking. In contrast, Angr
(5601) misinterprets bitwise operations as arithmetic, and Binja(7264) struggles to unify shifts
and masks. DeWolf (9,898) and some LLM decompilers exhibit high error rates due to fragmented
expressions and logical oversimplifications.
const char *__fastcall
avahi_dns_class_to_string(__int16 a1)
{
const char *result; // rax
result = "FLUSH";
if ( a1 >= 0 )
{
result = "IN";
if ( a1 != 1 )
{
result = "ANY";
if ( a1 != 255 )
return 0LL;
}
}
return result;
}

48 : v2) + a1), which maintains high semantic
fidelity while combining conditional expressions.
These strengths enable both tools to provide reliable, post-process-ready outputs with minimal need
for manual corrections, outperforming traditional
decompilers in accuracy and readability.
char *__fastcall
avahi_dns_packet_extend(__int64 *a1,
__int64 a2) {
__int64 v2;
unsigned __int64 v3;
_QWORD *v4;
if (!a1) {
__assert_fail("p",
"/tmp/avahi_avahi_dns_packet_extend
.c", 0x2Cu,
"avahi_dns_packet_extend");
}
v2 = *a1;
v3 = *a1 + a2;
if (v3 > a1[2]) {
return 0LL;
}
v4 = (_QWORD *)a1[5];
*a1 = v3;
if (!v4) {
v4 = a1 + 6;
}
return (char *)v4 + v2;
}

int64_t
avahi_dns_packet_extend(int64_t a1,
int64_t a2) {
if (a1 == 0) {
__assert_fail("p",
"/tmp/avahi_avahi_dns_packet_extend
.c", 44, "avahi_dns_packet_extend");
return &g3;
}
uint64_t v1 = a2 + a1;
if (v1 > *(int64_t *)(a1 + 16))
{
return 0;
}
int64_t v2 = *(int64_t *)(a1 +
40);
*(int64_t *)a1 = v1;
return (v2 == 0 ? a1 + 48 : v2)
+ a1;
}

(a) Pointer numerical
operation by Hexrays

(b) Pointer numerical
operation by RetDec

Figure 8: Cases related to the control flow recovery in
Hexrays.

Figure 9: Cases related to the complex operator in
HexRays and RetDec.

HexRays and Retdec excel in handling complex bitwise operations and accurately recovering high-level semantics, such as sign extension,
shifting, and masking. Specific examples in the
provided implementations(Figure 9 demonstrate
their advantages. In the HexRays output, line 11
combines pointer arithmetic and bounds-checking
effectively (v3 = *a1 + a2), ensuring correctness while preserving clarity. Line 20 integrates
fallback pointer logic with precise pointer arithmetic (return (char *)v4 + v2), highlighting
HexRays’ ability to produce accurate and readable
code. Similarly, the Retdec implementation shines
in line 34 by seamlessly handling conditional logic
for fallback pointers (return (v2 == 0 ? a1 +

In contrast, our error analysis shows that Angr
misinterprets bitwise operations as arithmetic and
often omits crucial details like sign extension.
Binja, while capable of handling basic bitwise operations, struggles to combine shifts and masks into
cohesive expressions, leading to less accurate recovery. LLM-based approaches frequently fail to
interpret complex operations correctly, introducing
logical errors or oversimplifi-cations, particularly
in edge cases. DeWolf often fragments expressions, reducing readability and risking incorrect
optimization when recompiled. Additionally, its
simplification of bounds-checking expressions can
compromise runtime safety and correctness in edge
cases.

Decompilation-specialized models such as
MLM and LLM4Decompile significantly outperform other methods in resolving Dependency/Redefinition Issues (IX), with error counts of 188 and
160, respectively. In contrast, traditional decompilers, despite incorporating domain-specific fixes
(e.g., handling includes, typedefs, and defines), inadvertently introduce redefinition conflicts with
Clang-extracted include statements, as evidenced
by Angr’s 2938 errors. Similarly, general LLMbased decompilers exacerbate these issues by inserting custom macros and headers (e.g., Qwen:
2138 errors). However, specialized models exhibit
pronounced weaknesses in Type Definition/Resolution (XII) and User-Defined Type Issues (VIII),
with error counts starkly exceeding those of traditional tools like Hex-Rays and RetDec and even

lagging behind general LLMs. This stems from
their prioritization of readability and dependency
simplification over precise type inference, often
replacing complex pointer dereferences with fabricated types.
General LLMs, while robust in type-related tasks
due to pretraining on diverse code patterns, struggle
with File and Resource Issues (II), Function Declaration/Invocation (VII), and Dependency/Redefinition Issues (IX), frequently inserting nonexistent
headers, altering function parameters, introducing
external dependencies or rewriting external call
functions. Across all methods, type, variable, and
function-related errors dominate the failure modes,
underscoring the persistent challenges in balancing
syntactic correctness with semantic fidelity.

