Decomperson: How Humans Decompile
and What We Can Learn From It
Kevin Burk, Fabio Pagani, Christopher Kruegel,
and Giovanni Vigna, UC Santa Barbara
https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity22/presentation/burk

This paper is included in the Proceedings of the
31st USENIX Security Symposium.
August 10–12, 2022 • Boston, MA, USA
978-1-939133-31-1

Open access to the Proceedings of the
31st USENIX Security Symposium is
sponsored by USENIX.

D ECOMPERSON: How Humans Decompile and What We Can Learn From It
Kevin Burk
UC Santa Barbara
kburk@ucsb.edu

Fabio Pagani
UC Santa Barbara
pagani@ucsb.edu

Abstract

Human analysts must reverse engineer binary programs
as a prerequisite for a number of security tasks, such as
vulnerability analysis, malware detection, and firmware
re-hosting. Existing studies of human reversers and the
processes they follow are limited in size and often use
qualitative metrics that require subjective evaluation.
In this paper, we reframe the problem of reverse engineering
binaries as the problem of perfect decompilation, which is the
process of recovering, from a binary program, source code
that, when compiled, produces binary code that is identical
to the original binary. This gives us a quantitative measure
of understanding, and lets us examine the reversing process
programmatically.
We developed a tool, called D ECOMPERSON, that supported
a group of reverse engineers during a large-scale security
competition designed to collect information about the participants’ reverse engineering process, with the well-defined
goal of achieving perfect decompilation. Over 150 people participated, and we collected more than 35,000 code submissions,
the largest manual reverse engineering dataset to date. This includes snapshots of over 300 successful perfect decompilation
attempts. In this paper, we show how perfect decompilation
allows programmatic analysis of such large datasets, providing
new insights into the reverse engineering process.

1

Introduction

The reverse engineering of binary code is a key process in a
number of security tasks, from malware analysis to vulnerability discovery. Unfortunately, reverse engineering binary code
is a challenging task, as the process that transforms source
code into executable code results, in most cases, in the loss of
high-level constructs, such as structured control flow, complex
data structures, variable names, and function signatures.
The fundamental task of reverse engineering is to deduce
the information that the compiler has obscured, and to report
it in a human-friendly format. Reverse engineers often use
source code as this format; the process of recreating source
code from binary code is known as decompilation.
Decompiled code is often incomplete or pseudo-code, and
not valid in any real programming language. This is still useful
as a guide for humans trying to understand the binary, but we
believe that decompilation becomes even more useful when
it conforms to a programming language—ideally that of the
original program.
In the absolute best case, decompiled code would be valid
source code, and re-create the original binary when compiled.

USENIX Association

Christopher Kruegel
UC Santa Barbara
chris@cs.ucsb.edu

Giovanni Vigna
UC Santa Barbara
vigna@cs.ucsb.edu

This would enable a wide variety of new operations. For
example, such decompiled code could be used for patching,
allowing security analysts to patch at the source level instead
of directly modifying the binary [36]. This code could also
be used with source-based analysis techniques [31], or recompiled with the instrumentation required by fuzzing tools. It
could also be used to port a binary to other architectures—from
x86-64 to ARM, for example—or it could be recompiled with
additional optimizations [44].
We assert that this “perfect” decompilation is the ultimate
goal of all decompilers, human or otherwise. We show
that perfect decompilation is achievable by human reverse
engineers today, and that it allows study of the reversing
process at scale. These larger studies can then be used to
improve the automatic compilers of tomorrow.
Automatic Decompilers. Decompilation is a challenging
process, requiring intense focus from highly skilled reverse engineers. Therefore, the ability to decompile binaries programmatically can save a significant amount of time and effort. Even
partial decompilation can be useful for program comprehension, as source code is much easier to read than raw assembly.
Automatic decompilation techniques have received much attention in the past few decades. Cifuentes laid the foundations
of modern decompilers in the mid-nineties [9], and further
research works have proposed techniques to improve the
recovery of control-flow constructs [5, 18, 49–51], types [7, 12,
13, 29, 32], and even variable names [1, 2, 7, 21, 22, 26]. More
recently, a number of machine learning techniques have also
been used to improve decompilation [15, 16, 19, 23, 24, 28].
Most of these approaches use readability metrics for evaluation, as they are intended to help human reverse engineers.
Only a few of them focus on the correctness of the decompiled
code. Schwartz et al. [5] were the first to propose correctness
as a metric to evaluate a decompiler. They use a test suite to
determine whether or not a decompiled program preserves the
semantics of the original binary. Schulte et al. [38] extended
this concept by introducing Byte-Equivalent Decompilation
(BED), a decompilation technique based on genetic programming. The authors use byte-similarity between binaries as a
fitness function for their evolutionary algorithm; any individual
that reaches perfect byte-equivalence is guaranteed to be algorithmically equivalent to the original binary. The topic has also
been explored by Verbeek et al. [44], who recently developed
FoxDec, a decompilation framework based on formal methods
that produces sound and recompilable source code. In this case,
the recompiled code is guaranteed to have the correct behavior,
but this may be difficult to verify independently, as the resulting
binary could be considerably different from the original.

31st USENIX Security Symposium

2765

In general, automatic decompilers that aim for readability
tend to sacrifice correctness (or at least recompilability),
while those that aim for correctness do so at the expense of
readability. If we want decompilation that is both correct and
human-friendly, we must still rely on the ingenuity of humans.
Human Decompilers. Given that human reverse engineers
still produce the best decompiled code, it is surprising that
there are very few studies on how they do so. Existing studies
focus on higher-level understanding of binary programs, and
not on the low-level art of decompilation, which could provide
insights that could improve automatic decompilers. This paper
aims to bridge that gap.
In general, the problem of reverse engineering binaries
falls under the umbrella of program comprehension, which
is the study of how programmers understand unfamiliar code
bases [27, 40, 45]. This is a very broad field of research, which
includes understanding how programmers repair and maintain
software [46, 47] and how to create better tools to support the
comprehension process [25, 41].
In the past few years, program comprehension researchers
have started examining the process of reverse engineering.
Bryant [6], for example, presents three studies that explore the
conceptual aspects of reversing by various means: notes and
video taken during a reversing experiment, a semi-structured
interview with experts, and a “think-aloud” session where
participants were asked to reverse a key generation algorithm.
More recently, Votipka et al. [48] interviewed sixteen reverse
engineers as they reenacted a recent reverse engineering
activity. These interviews were also semi-structured, and the
authors used them to extract common themes. Taylor [42] presented a system to study the behavior of reverse engineers by
using an instrumented virtual machine that collects mouse and
keyboard events, process creations, and changes in window focus. Finally, Mantovani et al. [30] studied how humans reverse
engineer binary code, with an emphasis on the differences
between novices and experts. Their approach used a Restricted
Focus Viewer: basic blocks were blurred unless selected, allowing the authors to precisely track the subjects’ attention. Most
of these studies were—necessarily—small. They examined
the reversing process using methods that were human-friendly
but not amenable to automated analysis. As a result, the data
was limited to what the researchers could analyze manually.
Exploring the reversing process at scale remains challenging. The biggest obstacle is the difficulty of quantifying the
reversers’ understanding: there is currently no metric that can
describe how well a reverse engineer understands a function.
This is further complicated by the fact that experience plays
a key role in reversing, and reversers of different skill levels
may reach very different levels of understanding. Even having
a standard set of tasks does not guarantee consistency. Expert
reversers might be able to carry out their tasks successfully
with limited (but focused) understanding, while novices might
need to acquire more in-depth, detailed knowledge about a
binary before being able to meaningfully modify or exploit it.

2766

31st USENIX Security Symposium

We believe that the problem of quantifying comprehension
can be addressed by using a more formal language to explain
program behavior. Specifically, we require reverse engineers
to communicate their understanding of a function in the
form of compilable source code. In other words, we compare
the process of understanding binary code to the process of
decompilation.

2

Perfect Decompilation

In this paper, we study the human reverse engineering process
in terms of a new metric of program comprehension that we
call perfect decompilation. We consider decompiled code
for a function to be perfect if, when compiled with the same
compiler and options as the original, it produces the exact
same assembly.
Benefits. Expecting perfect decompilation is a high bar, but it
allows for a number of useful features. Primarily, it gives us a
quantitative measure of program comprehension: decompiled
code can be evaluated based on how close it is to perfect. In
this paper, we measure understanding as the Jaccard similarity
coefficient over lines of assembly code.
Perfect decompilation also gives reverse engineers an obvious “done” state. Code that achieves perfect decompilation has
very clearly captured the behavior of the original function. It
also avoids the ambiguity present in pseudo-code and natural
language. Saying “this function averages a list of integers”
does not capture what happens when the list is empty, but the
source code of the function will.
Furthermore, defining everything in terms of source and assembly code—both common and well-defined representations
of programs—allows for reverse engineers’ mental models
to be analyzed programmatically. As a result, studies can
be scaled to hundreds of individuals, unlike interview-based
approaches that are necessarily small and focus on qualitative
results.
Finally, perfect decompilation is trivial to prove correct:
a simple assembly diff is enough to prove perfection (or to
show what instructions differ). In contrast, proving that code
is functionally equivalent requires unit tests, and even these
are insufficient without an additional measure of coverage that
ensures all code paths are tested.
Limitations. Perfect decompilation is not a traditional reverse
engineering task, so there is some risk that using this metric
will distort the reversing process. For example, reverse
engineers do not usually report their findings as compilable
source code, so this requirement will add more work. However,
we believe that reverse engineers already have a code-like
mental model of binaries, and that it takes only minor extra
work to make this explicit.
Perfect decompilation also focuses on the careful analysis
of functions. Other skills are also important for reverse
engineers—for example, the ability to skim a large binary

USENIX Association

to determine on which functions to focus—but these will not
necessarily be captured by our metrics.
There is also a risk that reverse engineers may spend a nonnegligible amount of time “fighting with the compiler.” This
refers to the extra time spent by reversers who have a complete
mental model of a function, but struggle to reach perfect
decompilation due to the idiosyncrasies of the compiler.
We believe that only the third point above is a true threat
to our work, and that it is outweighed by the benefits of using
perfect decompilation.
Contributions. We define perfect decompilation as a new,
quantifiable metric of program comprehension. We develop
a tool, called D ECOMPERSON, that supports human reverse
engineers during the decompilation process and helps them
achieve perfect decompilation, recording the steps they
take along the way. We then set out to answer the following
research questions:
RQ1: Are humans capable of perfect decompilation?
RQ2: If they are, what processes do they follow when
decompiling?
RQ3: Are these processes representative of more traditional reverse engineering (program comprehension)
processes?
Our findings are based on the submissions to an online
security competition in which reverse engineers were asked
to use D ECOMPERSON while decompiling binaries written in
five different languages.1 Over 150 people participated—twice
as many as the next-largest study, and an order of magnitude
more than most—making this, to the best of our knowledge,
the largest decompilation study to date. It is also the first study
that has a concrete metric for levels of understanding during
the reverse engineering process.
By analyzing these submissions, we show that perfect
decompilation is within reach of humans today, and therefore
a reasonable goal for the automated decompilers of the future.
The results also show which key activities performed by
humans should be targeted by tools supporting the reverse engineering process, and provide insights that can be used to build
and improve automated and semi-automated decompilers.

3

D ECOMPERSON

We developed a custom tool, which we called D ECOMPERSON,
to collect source code submissions. The tool was designed to
give reverse engineers complete control over their source code
and to encourage frequent submissions, allowing us to collect
many “snapshots” over the course of the reversing process.
Typical reversing tools, such as Hex-Rays [20], Ghidra [17],
or Binary Ninja [3], provide some form of decompilation
1 Most existing studies and associated tools focus on C/C++ decompilation

only; we also cover Go, Rust, and Swift.

USENIX Association

functionality,2 but users have very little control over the
output. User input is typically limited to a small set of
well-defined interactions, such as renaming variables or
functions, providing type annotations, and inserting comments.
When using these tools, a reverse engineer’s workflow consists
of iteratively applying these annotations in order to coax better
and better source code out of the decompiler.
We believe that this style of interaction is too restrictive
to reliably produce perfect decompilation. As an alternative,
D ECOMPERSON gives users complete control over the decompiled code and helps them modify it until it compiles identically
to the original binary. Since this method of decompilation is
heavily reliant on the user, the tool attempts to make the user’s
job as easy as possible. D ECOMPERSON makes discrepancies
between the generated binary and the original one obvious, and
it provides a tight feedback loop, showing the user how each
source code modification changes the generated binary code.
The high-level workflow of D ECOMPERSON is the
following: 1 users edit the source code using our interface;
2 the source code is sent to our back-end component, where
it is compiled, disassembled, tested, and diffed against the
original binary; 3 the binary is scored based on the metrics
described in Section 4, and the results, including the diff, are
sent back to the interface.
The Interface. The heart of the D ECOMPERSON system is the
user interface, shown in Figure 1. On the left side, the interface
shows editable source code, which the user can compile at any
time. On the right side, the interface shows the target disassembly and any output from the compilation process. When
compilation fails, the right panel displays any errors reported
by the compiler. When compilation succeeds, D ECOMPERSON
shows the disassembly of the resulting binary, both in raw
format and in diff-style, which shows the differences between
the compiled binary and the original binary’s assembly code.
This diff view is the most important part of the system, as
it shows reverse engineers exactly where their binary does not
match the target, providing immediate feedback on the effects
of any source code change—typically within two seconds
of the user hitting the “Compile” button. In order to help
reversers focus on the more important structural changes first,
minor differences—such as instructions that differ only in
their operands—get more subdued highlighting.3 Both styles
of highlighting are visible in Figure 1.
The interface also provides a few other useful features. For
example, clicking a line of assembly highlights the corresponding line of source code; this mechanism is responsible
for the matching blue highlights in Figure 1. The interface also
offers a “Replace” function that lets reversers make cosmetic
replacements that clean up the disassembly view; for example,
one of our playtesters used this feature to hide stack layout
2 At the time of writing, these tools are not able to produce decompiled
code that can be recompiled.
3 The majority of these differences are caused by mismatched stack
layouts, as seen on lines 33–34 of Figure 1.

31st USENIX Security Symposium

2767

Figure 1: The D ECOMPERSON interface showing a partial solution to the baby-c challenge. The current decompiled source code
(provided by the user) is visible on the left, and the assembly diff is shown on the right. Instructions present in the target but missing
from the submission are shown in purple, while instructions that should be removed from the submission are shown in yellow.
Lines 16–20 of the disassembly show significant differences, and are displayed with a bright background; lines 33–34 contain
only operand differences, and are shown with a subdued background. The user has clicked on line 25 of the assembly code, and
the corresponding line of source code (line 22) has been highlighted to match.
mismatches completely—decluttering the diff while working
on control flow—and then fixed the stack layout at the end.
The Disassembler. We chose to show binary differences as
line-based assembly diffs. This has the benefit of familiarity:
all reverse engineers know assembly, and virtually all will have
used a command line diffing tool, like diff or git. There is
also the benefit of simplicity: the diff format can be displayed
in any text editor.
To keep these diffs usable, we needed assembly that was free
of any noise that would lead to spurious highlighting. The main
sources of noise are absolute memory addresses, which depend
on how the compiler lays out the binary. Examples of these addresses are code references (such as addresses used in call and
jmp instructions) and global data references (such as addresses
in the .bss region). Highlighting diffs that include these references would be cumbersome for D ECOMPERSON’s users, since
these differences are rarely fixable by editing the source code
of the function in which they appear. To avoid these problems,
D ECOMPERSON includes a custom disassembler that replaces

2768

31st USENIX Security Symposium

absolute memory references with symbols where possible, or
generic identifiers where not. For example, lines 13–14 of the
assembly code in Figure 1 show a sanitized block label and
jump, line 19 shows a symbol replacement, and line 21 shows
a sanitized global memory reference. The disassembler also
recovers string constants, as seen on line 21, helping reversers
by keeping the disassembly as self-contained as possible.
The Back-End. Whenever a user hits the “Compile” button,
the user-provided source code is sent to the D ECOMPERSON
back-end. This component compiles and tests the source code
submission in a container, and then scores it based on the
differences between its assembly and that of the target. If unit
tests are available for the binary, the submission is also scored
based on its performance on the tests. These scores are used
as a measure of source code correctness, and also serve as the
basis of the competition described in Section 4.
Compiling submissions on a central server allows us
to use the correct compiler for each submission, and also
relieves users of the burden of installing and managing

USENIX Association

different compilers for each language. In the current version
of D ECOMPERSON, we presume to know the toolchain and
the compilation options used to build the original binaries, and
use the correct versions to compile any user submissions. This
was sufficient for our research; a more advanced version could
integrate compiler provenance techniques to automatically
extract this information from binaries [8, 33–35, 37] and allow
users to add or select new compilers. This architecture also
allowed us to collect every source code submission that our
users made. This generated a large corpus of submissions,
recording our users’ reverse engineering processes from their
very first tentative solutions to an exact disassembly match.

4

D ECOMPETITION

The data we analyze in this paper comes from an online
competition called D ECOMPETITION, which we designed and
ran in November 2020. This was a competition purely focused
on reverse engineering and, to the best of our knowledge, the
first of its kind.4
Format. D ECOMPETITION was a 24-hour Jeopardy-style
competition.5 Each challenge was an executable binary, and the
competitors’ goal was to write source code that would compile
to an identical binary. Scores were based on binary similarity,
and calculated by both assembly diffing and unit testing.
Competitors were required to submit their source code
through the D ECOMPERSON interface, but were not required
to use the interface for reversing; output from other reversing
tools could easily be pasted in. Competitors were given access
to D ECOMPERSON and all the challenges as soon as the competition started, and could make any number of submissions.
Competitors played on teams of unlimited size. Anyone
wishing to play solo could play as a team of one, and most
players chose to do so.
Challenges. Multiple people from the UCSB security lab
contributed a total of 23 challenge binaries, covering five major
compiled systems languages: C, C++, Go, Rust, and Swift. The
binaries were not stripped, but did not include any debug information. An overview of these challenges is shown in Table 1.
The challenges were designed to use the features and
peculiarities of each programming language. For instance, a
challenge written in C traversed a linked list of structs, while
a C++ challenge made heavy use of classes and Standard
Template Library containers. Similarly, a challenge written
in Go was designed to use complex numbers, while another
challenge made use of Rust traits and networking.
4 This research has received IRB scrutiny, and was determined to be

exempt under Category 3. No personally identifiable information was used.
5 In Jeopardy-style security competitions, participants solve a number of
challenges from a list of options. They do not interact with other participants,
as is instead customary in traditional attack-defense security competitions.
Both Jeopardy-style and attack-defense competitions are often referred to
as “Capture the Flag” (CTF) competitions.

USENIX Association

We selected challenge ideas primarily to cover a variety
of language features. A spectrum of difficulty levels was also
desirable, but harder to estimate; challenge authors controlled
difficulty by limiting the number of lines of source code.
Authors also provided some scaffolding for each challenge:
• A set of unit tests to ensure that the semantics of the
original program were reproduced.
• Starter code to provide to the D ECOMPETITION
participants, which typically contained only stubs for
the functions a participant was expected to decompile,
data-type stubs, or include directives.
• A list of the functions that should be disassembled and
diffed, which was used as an input to the disassembler,
to make sure it only disassembled user-defined functions.
As a bonus, we provided Binary Ninja Intermediate
Language [4] for all challenges. This is a “semantic representation of [...] assembly language instructions”—a form
of decompilation that attempts to capture the operation of
binary code without tying it to any particular programming
language. This intermediate language served as an additional
perspective on the challenge binaries, and could be used even
by participants who did not have access to a decompiler. Like
other forms of decompilation, it tended to be helpful for C
binaries, but less so for other languages.
Scoring. We assigned each challenge an arbitrary value
between 100 and 500 points. These values reflected estimated
difficulty, and were mainly based on challenge size and the
presence of language-specific constructs that would make the
binary harder to reverse.
The values are well-correlated with the number of assembly
lines per challenge (Pearson’s r = 0.83), and their inverses
are well-correlated with the number of perfect submissions
per challenge (r = 0.70).6 There is also a correlation between
challenge value and average time to solve, but this is weaker
(r = 0.54 for mean; r = 0.59 for median).
One challenge per language was designated as a “baby”
challenge. These challenges were simple but worth extra
points, encouraging players to start there to learn the basics
of reversing code written in that specific language and to
familiarize themselves with D ECOMPERSON.
Each submission received a score based on the following
weighted components:
Test Score: Each challenge had a collection of test cases that
were not disclosed to the participants. Test case points
were awarded proportional to the number of test cases
passed. These points made up 20% of the total score.
Diff Score: The majority of the points came from matching
the target assembly. Each submission was compiled and
its user-implemented functions were disassembled. This
6 This jumps to r = 0.90 if the 200-point baby-c challenge is considered

an outlier and removed.

31st USENIX Security Symposium

2769

Challenge Statistics

Submission Statistics

Challs

Points

Source
Lines

Assembly
Lines

Ratio

Submissions

Compilable

Passing
Tests

Perfect
Decompilation

C
C++
Go
Rust
Swift

4
5
7
4
3

500
1,400
1,800
1,300
1,200

110
491
310
219
178

396
2,548
1,730
1,695
2,871

3.60
5.19
5.58
7.74
16.13

10,060
9,155
10,192
3,524
2,599

8,022
6,065
7,617
2,561
1,686

1,634
1,091
4,018
1,252
405

186
50
44
26
23

Total

23

6,200

1,486

9,240

7.06

35,530

25,951

8,400

329

Language

Table 1: An overview of the D ECOMPETITION challenges and submissions. Ratio is the average number of assembly lines
produced per source line. Only one perfect submission is counted per (team, challenge) pair. The number of Go submissions is
inflated by the top two teams trying to brute-force the unsolved julie challenge. See Appendix C for a more detailed breakdown.

Figure 2: Demographic information from the background survey. The bar graphs on the left show how participants are involved in
computer security, and for how long. The area plots on the right show how familiar participants are with programming and reversing
each of the languages used in the competition, as measured on a five-point Likert scale. Responses from all 308 respondents are
shown in light purple; responses from the 93 “committed” respondents who earned a 50% score or better on at least one challenge
are shown in dark purple.
portion of the score was calculated as the intersectionover-union (Jaccard similarity coefficient) of the submission versus the target, and made up 60% of the total score.
Bonus Score: In order to encourage participants to generate
perfect decompilation, the final 20% of the points were
awarded only when a submission matched the target
assembly exactly.
A team’s score on a challenge was the maximum score
achieved by any of its members’ submissions. A team’s total
score was the sum of these per-challenge scores. There was
no limit on the number or frequency of submissions, and any
new record would improve the team’s score; there was no way
for a team to lose points.
Recruiting. We recruited participants by word-of-mouth

2770

31st USENIX Security Symposium

and by announcing the competition on CTFtime [11], a
popular online index of security and hacking competitions. To
encourage participation, we split a $1,000 prize pool among
the top three teams and provided Binary Ninja licenses [3] to
the top two teams.
A total of 425 users and 238 teams registered for D ECOM PETITION , but only a fraction of those played. A total of 188
users and 139 teams made source code submissions; 159 users
and 114 teams submitted source code that could be compiled.
Demographics. Before the competition, we invited the
players to fill out a survey about their involvement in reverse
engineering. This survey consisted mainly of questions about
how—and for how long—the participants were involved in
computer security. The full survey can be found in Appendix A.

USENIX Association

A total of 308 people (72% of all registrants) filled out
this survey; the results are summarized in Figure 2. The large
majority of participants were either students or hobbyists,
and only a few worked in a position where they were paid as
reverse engineers. The majority were also new to computer
security, and to reverse engineering in particular—the number
of players at each year of experience decreases exponentially.
The survey also asked participants how familiar they were
with programming and reversing the languages used for
challenges. We found that participants were well versed
in C and C++ but significantly less familiar with Go, Rust,
and Swift. Given that these latter languages are becoming
more popular systems languages, this lack of familiarity may
indicate a gap in security education or a lack of tooling support.
We asked players to fill out a similar survey after the competition. This follow-up survey is described in Appendix B, and
was intended to capture any changes in players’ perception
of reversing that occurred during the competition; it also
provided a place to leave general feedback. Only 49 players
(12% of all registrants) chose to complete this second survey,
so it is likely less representative than the first.
Submissions. In order to study the process that humans use
when decompiling, we recorded all submissions made during
D ECOMPETITION. As summarized in Table 1, we received
a total of 35,530 source code submissions, 25,951 (73%) of
which successfully compiled. The majority of the submissions
were for challenges written in C, C++, and Go. With about
10,000 submissions each, these three languages account for
almost 83% of all submissions. Rust and Swift were less
popular, with around 3,000 submissions per language, likely
because of their perceived difficulty.
While fewer experts played than beginners, these experts
were able to solve more challenges, and thus made more
submissions. Overall, the submissions were balanced across
different levels of expertise. In total, 32,254 submissions
(90% of all submissions) were made by users who completed
the background survey. Among these, we received 9,553
submissions from expert users who claimed five or more years
of security experience, 7,155 (75%) of which compiled; 12,963
submissions from players with 2 to 4 years of experience,
9,271 (72%) of which compiled; and 9,738 submissions from
beginners with less than 2 years of experience, 6,908 (71%) of
which compiled. We estimate that beginners submitted around
30% of all decompilation attempts and intermediate players
around 40%, with experts responsible for the remaining 30%.
The number of submissions that passed all unit tests is also
interesting, but harder to interpret. Perhaps counterintuitively,
a language or challenge that has a higher percentage of passing
submissions is likely harder to perfectly decompile—the
reversers were able to replicate the binary’s behavior early
in the reversing process, but then had to make many more
submissions while trying to fix mismatches caused by the
compiler’s handling of various language constructs. Reversing
style also affects this statistic: reversers who reverse one

USENIX Association

function at a time cannot pass all tests until they start work
on the final function.
There are also some confounding factors. For example, all
participants worked on the C challenges, including those who
never made much progress, while only the most committed
reversers dared attempt the Rust and Swift challenges. Additionally, the number of Go submissions was inflated by the top
two teams trying to brute-force the unsolved julie challenge.

Figure 3: How difficult is completely recreating the source
code of a small binary? Top: Survey responses from all 308 respondents compared with those from the 93 committed players
who achieved a 50% score or better on at least one challenge.
Bottom: Responses before and after the competition from the
42 players who answered this question on both surveys.

5

RQ1: Can Humans Perfectly Decompile?

Expectations. We started this project unsure whether or not
humans would be able to consistently perform perfect decompilation. It was interesting, then, that many D ECOMPETITION
participants did not share our conservative views.
One of the questions in our pre-competition survey asked
the participants to rate, on a scale from trivial to impossible,
how difficult they thought it would be to recreate the source
code of a small binary. We summarize the responses in
Figure 3. The majority (37%) of all respondents thought it
would be a moderately difficult task, and 12% claimed that
it would be trivially easy. Only 20% of the responders thought
it would be difficult, and 5% thought it would be impossible.
The players who were able to reach a 50% score on at
least one challenge, however, had more realistic expectations.
Only 4% of this group had originally thought that perfect
decompilation would be trivially achievable,7 23% thought
7 Of the 19 “trivial” respondents who made source code submissions, 15

gave up without reaching a 50% score on any challenge.

31st USENIX Security Symposium

2771

Reg’d
Users
Teams

0% >0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%

425 188
238 139

159
114

120
82

110
76

103
72

91
66

91
66

Table 2: Numbers of users and teams who registered and who
made any submission reaching the listed cutoff scores on any
challenge. All submissions that successfully compiled got a
score greater than zero. The lack of attrition between 80% and
100% is an artifact of the 20% perfect match bonus described
in Section 4: any submission reaching 80% would earn the
bonus and jump up to a perfect score.
it would be difficult, and the majority (46%) believed it to be
a moderately difficult goal.
It is also interesting to see how opinions changed after using
D ECOMPERSON. Out of the 42 respondents that answered
both surveys, 11 lowered their difficulty expectations, 10
increased them, and 21 did not revise their assessment. Overall,
the trend was towards a tighter clustering around “moderate”
difficulty, and after the competition, none of the respondents
thought that perfectly decompiling a binary was impossible.
Perfect Decompilation. The results of D ECOMPETITION
show that the participants’ optimism was justified. Generating
perfect decompilation was certainly not trivial, but of the
players who were willing to put in the effort, a surprisingly
large number were able to achieve this goal, even when
confronted with higher-level languages.
As shown in the last column of Table 2, a total of 91 players
reached a perfect score on at least one challenge. This is only
48% of the 188 users who submitted source code, but 57% of
the 159 users who persisted until their code compiled. This
figure only improves if we set a higher bar for persistence: of
the 120 players who earned a 20% score on any challenge, for
instance, more than 75% would go on to reach a perfect score
on at least one challenge.
As reported in Table 1, the language with the highest
number of perfect submissions was C (186 submissions),
followed by C++ ( 50), Go (44), Rust (26), and finally Swift
(23). Interestingly, this order perfectly follows the languages’
ratio order reported in Table 1—higher-level languages tend
to produce more lines of assembly per source line, and are also
more difficult to decompile.
All challenges were attempted, and all but one were
perfectly decompiled by at least one participant. The top two
teams were able to solve all challenges except one—the Go
challenge julie—and both teams were able to pass all unit
tests and reach at least a 90% diff score on this unsolved challenge.8 Furthermore, with the exception of the C++ challenge
8 The julie challenge was a Go program that used a syscall to get the
terminal dimensions, then used complex128s to calculate and draw a Julia set
as ASCII art. The first-place team had explicitly zero-initialized their winsize
struct and captured it as a struct variable rather than a reference, both changes
that (for some reason) caused Go’s register allocator to behave differently.

2772

31st USENIX Security Symposium

lambic, where lambda expressions were used extensively, all
other challenges received at least three perfect solutions.
Player Distribution. Figure 4 gives a breakdown of the
players who made any submission earning at least a 20% score,
categorized both by years of experience and by security involvement. Solves per player are broken down into C and non-C
plots, as players treated C challenges differently than the rest.
Virtually all players attempted the C challenges, and
even the least-solved C challenge—the rootkit challenge,
which built and traversed a singly linked list of user-defined
structs—received 30 perfect solutions; the baby-c challenge
received the most, with 66. This resulted in a high number of
perfect solutions per player, even though there were only four
C challenges available. Experience had some effect, but not
a large one; beginners are able to reverse C relatively well.
On the other hand, experience played a more significant
role when reversing the other languages. As seen in Figure 4,
the Solves per Player ratio drops dramatically for players
with one or fewer years of experience; only a small number
of beginners submitted perfect solutions, despite there being
many more non-C challenges. Challenges written in these
languages also received more solutions from participants with
longer security careers, and those with five or more years of
reversing experience had a clear advantage. There was also
a more marked difference based on role, with researchers
outperforming the other participants.
Summary. These results validate our potentially ambitious
claims from Section 1: perfect decompilation is a reasonable
standard of program comprehension, reachable even by
non-experts. Experience, however, is certainly helpful,
especially when reversing higher-level languages.

6

RQ2: How do Humans Decompile?

Having shown that humans are capable of producing perfect
decompilation, the next step is to investigate how they do it.
Understanding this process is beneficial for a number of
different applications. In particular, a better grasp of the
reversing process and identifying the roadblocks that stand
in the way of perfect decompilation will support the design
and implementation of better tools to support human reversers.
This knowledge may also help improve automatic decompilers,
which can incorporate insights learned from human experts.
Since we collected tens of thousands of source code
submissions, we were interested in analyses that could be
performed programmatically. The metrics described below
provide quantitative alternatives to the more traditional
interview method of studying the reversing process.
Code and Score Changes. The first analysis we performed
involved the magnitude of the players’ code changes and
The second-place team handled the struct correctly, but did not realize that
the original program had used complex128s, and tried, unsuccessfully, to
replicate it with float64s.

USENIX Association

Figure 4: Distribution of active players and perfect submissions, broken down by involvement, experience, and language. “Active”
players reached a 20% score or better on at least one challenge. Only one perfect submission is counted per (user, challenge) pair.
the magnitude of the score changes they produced. Figure 5
summarizes the correlation between the two. The big cluster of
data points to the left in Figure 5 shows how each submission
tended to contain only minor changes from the previous
submission, which resulted in an even smaller change in
diff score. The average Levenshtein distance was only 47
characters (or 5 lines), and each submission yielded, on
average, a 1.5% improvement in diff score over the last.
Score improvement did increase slightly with edit size, but
the correlation was very loose, with a Pearson’s r of only 0.1.
In general, edits were almost as likely to cause the diff score
go down as to go up, and small edits were just as capable of
causing large score swings as large edits. Adjustments to stack
layout are a good example of this effect: changing the size
of a single local variable can potentially affect every stack
reference in a function.
These results show that reversers tried to approach the
solution through a series of small modifications, each testing
a hypothesis with a limited scope (e.g., the modification of
a single control-flow structure, or the type specification of a
single variable).
Function Focus. We were also able to measure which
functions reversers focused on over the course of a challenge.
Since our disassembler produced per-function output, we were
able to calculate per-function diff scores over time, and use
these as a proxy for attention: any function seeing frequent
changes in diff score was very likely to be the center of a
reverser’s attention.
The top row of Figure 6 shows the changes in function diff
scores over the course of three perfect solutions. The reversers
seemed to prefer working on one function at a time—although
this may have been encouraged by the per-function view of
the D ECOMPERSON interface; the (estimated) places where
they switched focus are shown on the graphs. This result
is confirmed when looking at the number of functions that
change between two subsequent submissions, which we
summarized in Table 3. Of the 24,265 non-Swift submissions

USENIX Association

Figure 5: Diff score changes versus code changes, measured
as the Jaccard distance on source code lines. For the sake of
readability, only 10% of the submissions are visible in the
scatter plot. The line of best fit is shown in light purple.
that compile,9 19,940 (82%) include changes affecting only
a single function. Edits are also highly clustered over time;
any function that was modified by one edit has about an 80%
chance of being modified again by the next.
More generally, we found that reversers tended to operate
in two distinct stages:
• During the first stage, reversers operated at the level of
the entire program. In this stage, they would stub out the
program, making sure that functions had enough code to
successfully compile, and that the functions had the correct type signatures. The latter was particularly important
for name-mangled languages: these languages embed the
type signature in the function symbol name, and our differ
9 The library we used to classify code changes did not support Swift.

31st USENIX Security Symposium

2773

Figure 6: The processes followed by three expert reversers as they solved the baby-cpp, unfair, and wolfgang challenges,
respectively. Diff scores by function are shown on top, and edit density per function is shown on the bottom. Submissions that
did not compile are omitted. Function focus can be observed both as fluctuations in function diff score and as clusters of edits.
Places where the reversers switched focus to a different function are marked with vertical lines.
could not locate functions until the prototype was correct.
During this stage, we would typically see minor
increases in the diff scores for all functions. It was also
common for the first few submissions to not compile at
all—only 37% of the initial submissions did so—and the
first submission that did compile would typically contain
edits to multiple functions.
• Once the program was stubbed out, reversers would move
on to the second stage. In this stage, they would focus on
one function until they got stuck or were able to achieve
a perfect disassembly match. Once this happened, they
would move on to the next function, repeating this step
as many times as necessary to fully recreate the program.
This pattern is visible in Figure 6, where changes in focus
are marked with vertical lines.
These observations mirror the model extracted by Votipka et
al. [48]. In their study of the more traditional reverse engineering process, the authors found that reversers operate in three distinct phases: overview, sub-component scanning, and focused
experimentation. In the overview phase, reversers acquire a
broad overview of the program’s functionality, which is then refined in the latter two phases. Our analysis shows that reversers
follow a similar approach when decompiling binaries: Our
phase one condenses the overview and sub-component scanning stages, as reversers determine what the binary does, and
recreate how its functional components fit together. Our phase
two corresponds to the focused experimentation stage. Each
source code submission is effectively a hypothesis about how
a function was implemented, and the response from D ECOM PERSON offers evidence either for or against that hypothesis.

2774

31st USENIX Security Symposium

Number of Modified Functions
Language

0

1

2

3

C
C++
Go
Rust
Swift

540
570
760
300
—

6,931
4,954
6,200
1,855
—

443
322
522
268
—

108
219
135
138
—

Total

2,170

19,940

1,555

600

Table 3: The number of edits that touched any given number
of functions. The vast majority of edits only modified a single
function.

We also observed that the reversers chose functions to
focus on based on the binary’s control flow graph. Most
reversers operated in a breadth-first manner: 75% of the
perfect solutions to two-function binaries focused on main()
first. For binaries with three or more functions, 46% of the
solutions focused on main() first, while 29% saved it for
last. This preference for breadth-first reversing held for all
challenges except the C challenge rootkit, where depth-first
was slightly more popular, and all the Rust challenges, where
multi-function edits were more common and function focus
was harder to discern. There was no significant difference
between the behaviors of beginners and experts; function
order seems to be a matter of personal preference.
Edit Classification. The previous analyses highlight the
magnitude and location of individual source code changes,
but tell us very little about the reversers’ intent when making
those changes. We would also like to know the semantics of
each edit: what specific feature of the binary was the reverser
trying to reproduce?

USENIX Association

To extract this information, we used Tree-sitter [43], a
source code parsing library that supports all of the challenge
languages except Swift, which we did not include in this
analysis. Given a string of source code, Tree-sitter calculates
a “concrete syntax tree,” which includes the location of each
syntax node within the source string. We could combine this
information with the location of an edit to determine which
syntax nodes were affected. We then used the types of these
nodes—also provided by Tree-sitter—to classify the edit.
We recognize a total of eight semantic categories:
Control Flow: Constructs that redirect the execution of a
program, such as conditionals, loops, and exceptions.
Declarations: Definitions of new variables, typically locals.
We classify these separately from other statements because they change the layout of a function’s stack frame.
Functions: Changes that alter the signature of a function,
such as changes to the return type, name, or arguments.
Name Changes: Changes that only affect a single identifier,
typically caused by reversers renaming variables.
Statements: Typical imperative programming statements,
like assignments, increments, and function calls.
Types: Constructs that define custom data types, or edits to
member variables.
Comments: Changes to comments, typically made to
temporarily remove code, or to clean up the starter code.
Miscellaneous: Other edits. These are primarily changes to
import statements, preprocessor directives, and the like.
A single edit can have multiple classifications, depending on
the syntax nodes affected, and can contain multiple instances
of the same classification. For example, adding the following
C function
float hypotenuse (float a , float b) {
float a2 = a * a
float b2 = b * b;
return sqrt ( a2 + b2 );
}

would count as seven edits, namely three function edits
(the function and its two parameters), two declarations, one
statement (the function call), and one control-flow edit (the
return statement).
The ability to classify edits gives us a more detailed view into
the reverse engineering process. Figure 7 provides an example.
In this case, the reverser had initially focused on the main()
function, and was able to reach a reasonably high diff score
by decompiling its body, as evidenced by the declaration and
statement edits. After about ten minutes, however, other functions were needed by main(), and the reverser switched to the
stubbing phase described previously. This can be identified by
the prevalence of function prototype edits, and the fact that they
appear in many functions at approximately the same time. The

USENIX Association

Figure 7: Edit types over time as the top team solves the
unfair challenge. The diff score of each function (and of the
challenge as a whole, in the global row) is shown as a light gray
background. The stubbing phase is visible as a spate of function signature edits around the ten minute mark; the reverser
then focuses on one function at a time, bringing each one up to
100% with a series of edits to the function body. Another view
of this process is shown in the central column of Figure 6.
reverser then went to work on find(), then clean(), and finally crypt(). These latter changes were all function body edits, and classified as variable declarations, control flow changes,
and generic statements (assignments and function calls).
In general, participants made most of their function
signature edits early in the course of reversing a function,
and most of their variable name edits later on, once they had
a better idea of what the variables were used for. Data type
edits also tended to be made later. Declaration, statement,
and control flow edits made up the majority of the reversing
work, and remained consistently common, with the reversers
showing a slight preference for handling control flow early
on and fixing declarations towards the end.
Other patterns of edits appear in specific circumstances.
Reversers trying to fix stack layout mismatches, for example,
will make lots of edits to variable declarations, while reversers
recovering user-defined structs will make mainly data type edits. And some languages have their own idiosyncrasies; during
D ECOMPETITION, for example, teams fighting with Go’s register allocator would often try renaming variables in an attempt
to appease it, resulting in a multitude of variable name edits.

31st USENIX Security Symposium

2775

Summary. Reversers prefer to make frequent, small code
changes, submitting often and refining their mental model
of the program based on the resulting assembly changes.
Experience is useful, particularly for higher-level languages,
allowing reversers to quickly map common assembly patterns
to the corresponding source code patterns.
We also found that reversers tend to start work by recreating
an outline of the program, providing stubs for all the important
functions—a task that could be made easier in a dedicated
function stubbing view with a built-in demangler. They then
refine these functions one at a time, typically in an order based
on the control flow graph.
Within each function, there were two main challenges: to
replicate the behavior of the function and to make sure the
local variables are in the correct stack slots. These tasks could
also be streamlined with dedicated views: a graph-matching
algorithm could be used to generate local variable aliases
(instead of stack offsets) for use while working on functionality, and variable declarations could likely be reordered
automatically to give the correct stack layout. The reversers’
concentration on single functions also suggests that humans
are able to generate perfect decompilation without relying on
the interprocedural context used by automatic decompilers.

7

• Requiring perfect decompilation makes it trivial to confirm that a participant has completely reversed a function.

• We assume that reversers have a code-like internal
representation of the behavior of functions, so requiring participants to submit valid source code merely
standardizes the language of communication.10

The third and final point is the only one where perfect
decompilation task differs from traditional reverse engineering.
The first two points are extensions of existing tasks, but the
third adds a new one: convincing the compiler to generate
specific binary output.
Fighting the Compiler. Perfect decompilation represents
the highest standard for reverse engineering: a source code
that matches the original binary has, by definition, the exact
semantics of the original source code. However, it is arguable
that such a goal could be too far-fetched, and that equivalent
code—measured by unit tests—might be a more realistic goal.
The risk here is that reversers aiming for perfect decompilation,
such as the D ECOMPETITION participants, might spend a
significant portion of their time fighting with the compiler,
making our observations less representative of the traditional
reversing process.
We believed that in general, reversers would follow two
strategies: they would either attempt to pass all unit tests first
and work on matching assembly later, or they would work
directly on achieving a perfect assembly match and thus not
pass all test cases until the end. To study this behavior, we
selected the sequences of submissions that resulted in a perfect
decompilation, and we located the first submission in each
sequence that passed all unit tests.
We found that 70% of the reversers earned a 100% test score
within the first 90% of their submissions, although some of
these may have been assembly-first users who passed tests
early by chance. These users spent, on average, the first 51%
of their submissions and 60% of their time reaching perfect
test scores, and the remainder perfecting their assembly. In
contrast, the pool of all reversers took, on average, 69% of
their submissions and 70% of their time to pass all unit tests.
The exact ratios varied significantly by language; C++ and
Swift had the easiest compilers to mimic (only 27% and 31%
of solve time, respectively, was spent on this stage), and Go
and Rust had the hardest (45% and 51%, respectively).
Reversing vs. Decompilation. As mentioned in the previous
section, when analyzing the submissions, we observed many
of the same behaviors as Votipka et al. [48], indicating that
we are measuring a similar, if not identical, process.
Furthermore, the D ECOMPERSON interface maps nicely
onto the traditional reversing process. Reversing studies—all
the way back to much earlier program comprehension studies [27]—frame reversing as a series of hypotheses made by the
reverser: with D ECOMPERSON, each source code submission
is a hypothesis about program behavior, and the response from
the back-end helps confirm or disprove that hypothesis.
We also have evidence that the diff scores used in D ECOM PETITION correlate well with function behavior. After the competition, we wrote unit tests for most of the leaf functions, and

10 This also prevents reversers from glossing over functionality they don’t

fully understand.

RQ3: Does Reversing Equal Decompilation?

As mentioned previously, perfect decompilation is a very
exacting goal, requiring more effort from the reverser than
a traditional reversing task. Since the D ECOMPETITION
participants were required to generate perfect decompilation
for each challenge binary in order to get a perfect score, there
is some concern that our observations are not applicable to
reversing in general. However, we can show that the process
involved is not substantially different.
Traditional reversing tasks, such as binary patching or
vulnerability discovery, require extremely precise knowledge
of particular “focus points” of a program, namely the points
with potential bugs. These points are typically a small fraction
of the entire binary, but a successful reverser will need
complete knowledge of what the program is supposed to
do—as well as how it does it—at each of them. In this light,
perfect decompilation is primarily an extension of traditional
reverse engineering:
• Reversers already dedicate very close attention to focus
points, so asking participants to devote that level of
analysis to an entire (small) binary is simply an extension
of an existing reversing task rather than a new one.

2776

31st USENIX Security Symposium

USENIX Association

Figure 8: Example distributions of per-function unit test scores and per-function diff scores. Medians are shown as dark purple
bars; means are shown as black dots. Lines of best fit are shown in pale gray.
tested the submissions. These test scores were not visible to
the participants, and thus could not be used as a decompilation
guide, but nevertheless corresponded to the submissions’ perfunction diff scores; some examples can be seen in Figure 8.
The left two plots show more typical distributions of
submission scores. Submissions are balanced across the
number of unit tests passed, and the unit test scores are
well-correlated with the diff scores, with a Pearson’s r of 0.75
and 0.64, respectively. This suggests that in the general case,
diff scores, which capture binary similarity, are a good proxy
for unit test scores, which capture functionality.
The rightmost plot shows a pathological case. The diff and
test scores are still reasonably well-correlated (r = 0.50), but
the vast majority of submissions passed all the unit tests with a
mediocre diff score. This shows that the reversers were able to
replicate the behavior of the target function relatively quickly,
but then spent a significant amount of time getting rustc to
generate an exact assembly match.
Summary. Decompilation is a natural extension of traditional reversing. Reversers already generate a code-like
representation of the programs they work on, so turning
reversing into decompilation is simply a matter of writing this
representation in a well-defined language—and recovering
a precise representation of an entire function.
Perfect decompilation is no longer purely an extension of the
existing process, as it requires more effort to convince the compiler to generate specific output, but we found that even in this
case the process correlates well with function comprehension.

8

Threats to Validity

Experimental Setup. While we tried to reproduce standard
reversing activities as closely as possible, some differences
were unavoidable. For example, running the competition in
a web-based editor took people out of their familiar reversing
environments. After the competition, some players suggested
modifications to the web interface to make it easier to use,
while others were interested in integrating D ECOMPERSON

USENIX Association

into their pre-existing reversing environments. However, we
believe that the web-based interface did not affect how humans
approach the decompilation problem, although it may have
influenced the timings recorded during the competition.
Automatic Decompilers. Participants were able to paste the
output of automatic decompilers into the D ECOMPERSON
editor. While this could potentially mean that we were not
observing the human reversing process, we found that this was
a rare behavior, and that the tools were not always helpful.
As an illustration, Figure 9 shows the maximum similarity
between any user’s rootkit submissions and the output of
the Hex-Rays decompiler. Only submissions with over 50%
similarity clearly resemble Hex-Rays, and only two users
(visible on the right in the first plot) achieved a perfect score
with code in this range.
Overall, after analyzing the C submissions, we found that
almost 20% of all function decompilation attempts included
a submission that clearly resembled tool output. Hex-Rays
was the most popular tool, accounting for 10% of all attempts,
followed by Ghidra at 7% and Binary Ninja at 3%. However,
only 6% of all attempts achieved perfect decompilation with
code that resembled tool output;11 once the output had been
edited into perfect decompilation, it was often no closer to the
original than a solution that had been written by hand.
Automatic decompilation was not useful for any other
languages. Only 2% of C++ function decompilation attempts,
for example, attempted to use tool output, and none of these
were successful. In fact, there were no perfect submissions
for any non-C languages that resembled tool output.
However, traditional reversing tools still proved useful as
a reversing aid. Fully 80% of the players who responded to the
follow-up survey reported using at least one tool “often” while
working on the challenge binaries. Hex-Rays was the most
popular tool, used often by about 50% of the respondents;
Ghidra and Binary Ninja were used by about 33% each. Most
11 The vast majority of these successful attempts came from the prime
and baby-c challenges, at 18% and 6% respectively. The other C challenges
had an average tool success rate of 1%.

31st USENIX Security Symposium

2777

team chat to prevent conflicting edits to the same challenge;
other teams may have used a similar system.

9

Figure 9: Similarity of all rooktit decompilation attempts to
Hex-Rays output, measured as Jaccard similarity over character diffs and ordered by similarity of the alloc_task function.
Maximum similarity of any submission is shown as lines;
maximally similar perfect decompilation is shown as points.
respondents used multiple tools, and only two (4%) used none.
Function Symbols. Our custom disassembler uses function
symbols to identify which functions to disassemble; therefore,
the D ECOMPETITION binaries contained function symbols.
In practice, these are not always available. Symbols can be
“stripped” from real-world binaries—usually to obfuscate
them or to reduce their size—and adding meaningful function
names is an important step when reversing these.12
Having access to function symbols saved our reversers some
work. Although the function names used in D ECOMPETITION
were not particularly descriptive, they still provided some
hints about what each function did. Additionally, the function
symbols in name-mangled languages encode the types of each
function’s parameters, which can be quite useful for reversing.
We do not believe that this information significantly altered
the decompilation process, but further study, using stripped
binaries and a more advanced function identification algorithm,
would be needed to definitively show the size of the effect.
Collaboration. D ECOMPETITION was an online competition,
so we could not prevent users from collaborating on their
decompilation. However, we took the following steps to limit
this phenomenon: (1) the online interface was not designed
to be used collaboratively; (2) players had individual logins;
and (3) we used IP addresses to distinguish submissions that
were likely done by multiple users.
Overall, more than 80% of all players used the same IP
address for the entire competition, and 75% of all decompilation attempts did not include submissions from interleaved
IP addresses. The vast majority of the interleaved submissions
came from well-established teams, who were accustomed to
sharing team accounts in other competitions. We know that
the top-scoring team used an informal “lock” protocol in their
12 Function symbols are not uncommon, even in a reversing context;
dynamically linked binaries contain external function symbols even after
stripping, and in 2018, Cozzi et al. found that about 75% of Linux malware
was not stripped at all [10].

2778

31st USENIX Security Symposium

Future Work

D ECOMPERSON was developed with D ECOMPETITION
and humans in mind, but we believe that, with the necessary
improvements, it could be used as a general-purpose reversing
tool. For example, the current system relies on the user to
provide all insights. The D ECOMPERSON interface makes it
obvious where assembly mismatches occur, but the responsibility of identifying the causes of these mismatches—and
of providing code that avoids them—lies solely with the
human operator. A more intelligent system would be able
to recognize causes of particular classes of mismatches and
suggest potential solutions.
Such a system could be trained on the output of human
reversers, including the data we collected here. Then,
depending on the quality of its suggestions, it could be put
to a variety of uses: a more rudimentary system could offer
suggestions to novice reverse engineers, helping them until
they reach a perfect match; an advanced system could provide
likely mutations to power a genetic decompiler, such as
BED [38]. This system could be part of a hybrid framework
as well, automating decompilation as much as possible before
falling back to the user for guidance [39].
This intersection of human and automated decompilation—
the same frontier that inspired this paper—still seems the most
promising direction for future research: the human insights
recorded here can be used to improve future decompilers,
which in turn will reduce the workload of their human users, a
trend towards combining human input and automated analysis
that has recently received substantial attention [14, 39].

10

Conclusions

The process of understanding binary code can be modeled
as the process of decompilation. In particular, it is possible
to set a precise, measurable goal by requiring that a human
perform perfect decompilation. We maintain that such a high
standard is not unreasonable: our study demonstrated that
perfect decompilation of small programs is within reach of
human reverse engineers today. We believe that the insights
from our experiment (the largest of this kind ever performed)
can be used to better understand the human reversing process.
Finally, we offer the dataset we collected during our study to
anyone wanting to study the process of human decompilation.
We showed some of the data that can be extracted, but we
believe that many more insights remain. We hope that it will
be used in the spirit of the competition from which it arose:
as a small step towards perfect decompilation.

USENIX Association

Artifacts
All challenges used in D ECOMPETITION, including
solutions and test cases, are available here: h t t p s :
//github.com/decompetition/challenges-2020
The environment used to build and test the challenges is available as a Docker container: h t t p s :
//hub.docker.com/r/decompetition/builder-2020
The D ECOMPERSON server and web interface can be found
here: https://github.com/decompetition/server
The D ECOMPERSON disassembler and differ are also
available as a standalone tool, which can be found here:
https://github.com/decompetition/disassembler
The full (anonymized) submission dataset is also available:
https://github.com/decompetition/data

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Noah Spahn and Lukas Dresel
for writing and playtesting so many, many challenges; the
folks at Vector 35 for giving us space on Binary Ninja Cloud
and donating Binary Ninja licenses as extra prizes; and all the
random hackers of the internet who for some reason didn’t
have anything better to do than play our silly reversing game.
This material is based on research sponsored by DARPA under agreement number FA8750-19-C-0003 and by NSF under
award CNS-1704253. The U.S. Government is authorized to
reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes
notwithstanding any copyright notation thereon. The views
and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors
and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the
official policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied,
of DARPA or the U.S. Government.

References
[1] Fiorella Artuso, Giuseppe Antonio Di Luna, Luca
Massarelli, and Leonardo Querzoni. Function naming
in stripped binaries using neural networks. CoRR, 2019.
[2] Pratyay Banerjee, Kuntal Kumar Pal, Fish Wang, and
Chitta Baral. Variable name recovery in decompiled
binary code using constrained masked language
modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.12801, 2021.
[3] Binary Ninja. https://binary.ninja/.
[4] Binary Ninja Intermediate Language.
https:
//docs.binary.ninja/dev/bnil-overview.html.
[5] David Brumley, JongHyup Lee, Edward J Schwartz,
and Maverick Woo. Native x86 decompilation using
semantics-preserving structural analysis and iterative
control-flow structuring. In 22nd USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security 13), 2013.

USENIX Association

[6] Adam Bryant. Understanding How Reverse Engineers
Make Sense of Programs from Assembly Language
Representations. PhD thesis, 2012.
[7] Qibin Chen, Jeremy Lacomis, Edward J Schwartz, Claire
Le Goues, Graham Neubig, and Bogdan Vasilescu.
Augmenting decompiler output with learned variable
names and types. 31st USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 22), 2022.
[8] Yu Chen, Zhiqiang Shi, Hong Li, Weiwei Zhao, Yiliang
Liu, and Yuansong Qiao. Himalia: Recovering compiler
optimization levels from binaries by deep learning. In
SAI Intelligent Systems Conference, 2018.
[9] Cristina Cifuentes. Reverse compilation techniques.
1994.
[10] Emanuele Cozzi, Mariano Graziano, Yanick Fratantonio,
and Davide Balzarotti. Understanding linux malware.
In 2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP),
2018.
[11] CTFtime. https://ctftime.org/.
[12] EN Dolgova and AV Chernov. Automatic reconstruction of data types in the decompilation problem.
Programming and Computer Software, 2009.
[13] Javier Escalada, Ted Scully, and Francisco Ortin.
Improving type information inferred by decompilers
with supervised machine learning, 2021.
[14] Dustin Fraze.
Computers and Humans Exploring Software Security (CHESS).
https:
//www.darpa.mil/program/computers-and-huma
ns-exploring-software-security, 2019.
[15] Cheng Fu, Huili Chen, Haolan Liu, Xinyun Chen, Yuandong Tian, Farinaz Koushanfar, and Jishen Zhao. Coda:
An end-to-end neural program decompiler. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
[16] Cheng Fu, Kunlin Yang, Xinyun Chen, Yuandong Tian,
and Jishen Zhao. N-bref : A high-fidelity decompiler
exploiting programming structures, 2021.
[17] Ghidra. https://ghidra-sre.org/.
[18] Andrea Gussoni, Alessandro Di Federico, Pietro
Fezzardi, and Giovanni Agosta. A comb for decompiled
c code. In 15th ACM Asia Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, 2020.
[19] Iman Hosseini and Brendan Dolan-Gavitt. Beyond the
c: Retargetable decompilation using neural machine
translation. 2022.
[20] IDA Pro. https://www.hex-rays.com/ida-pro/.

31st USENIX Security Symposium

2779

[21] Alan Jaffe. Suggesting meaningful variable names
for decompiled code: a machine translation approach.
In 11th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software
Engineering, 2017.

[33] Yuhei Otsubo, Akira Otsuka, Mamoru Mimura, Takeshi
Sakaki, and Hiroshi Ukegawa. o-glassesx: Compiler
provenance recovery with attention mechanism from a
short code fragment. 2020.

[22] Alan Jaffe, Jeremy Lacomis, Edward J Schwartz,
Claire Le Goues, and Bogdan Vasilescu. Meaningful
variable names for decompiled code: A machine
translation approach. In 26th Conference on Program
Comprehension, 2018.

[34] Davide Pizzolotto and Katsuro Inoue. Identifying compiler and optimization options from binary code using
deep learning approaches. In 2020 IEEE International
Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution
(ICSME), 2020.

[23] Deborah S Katz, Jason Ruchti, and Eric Schulte. Using recurrent neural networks for decompilation. In 2018 IEEE
25th International Conference on Software Analysis,
Evolution and Reengineering (SANER). IEEE, 2018.

[35] Ashkan Rahimian, Paria Shirani, Saed Alrbaee, Lingyu
Wang, and Mourad Debbabi. Bincomp: A stratified
approach to compiler provenance attribution. Digital
Investigation, 2015.

[24] Omer Katz, Yuval Olshaker, Yoav Goldberg, and Eran
Yahav. Towards neural decompilation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.08325, 2019.
[25] Rainer Koschke. Software visualization in software
maintenance, reverse engineering, and re-engineering:
a research survey. Journal of Software Maintenance and
Evolution: Research and Practice, 2003.
[26] Jeremy Lacomis, Pengcheng Yin, Edward Schwartz,
Miltiadis Allamanis, Claire Le Goues, Graham Neubig,
and Bogdan Vasilescu. Dire: A neural approach to
decompiled identifier naming. In 34th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE), 2019.
[27] Stanley Letovsky. Cognitive processes in program
comprehension. Journal of Systems and software, 1987.
[28] Ruigang Liang, Ying Cao, Peiwei Hu, and Kai
Chen. Neutron: an attention-based neural decompiler.
Cybersecurity, 2021.
[29] Alwin Maier, Hugo Gascon, Christian Wressnegger, and
Konrad Rieck. Typeminer: Recovering types in binary
programs using machine learning. In International
Conference on Detection of Intrusions and Malware,
and Vulnerability Assessment. Springer, 2019.
[30] Alessandro Mantovani, Simone Aonzo, Yanick Fratantonio, and Davide Balzarotti. Re-mind: a first look inside
the mind of a reverse engineer. In 31st USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security 22), 2021.
[31] Alessandro Mantovani, Luca Compagna, Yan Shoshitaishvili, and Davide Balzarotti. The convergence of
source code and binary vulnerability discovery – a case
study. In ACM Symposium on Information, Computer
and Communications Security (ASIACCS22), 2022.
[32] Alan Mycroft. Type-based decompilation (or program
reconstruction via type reconstruction). In European
Symposium on Programming. Springer, 1999.

2780

31st USENIX Security Symposium

[36] Pemma Reiter, Hui Jun Tay, Westley Weimer, Adam
Doupé, Ruoyu Wang, and Stephanie Forrest. Automatically mitigating vulnerabilities in x86 binary programs
via partially recompilable decompilation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.12336, 2022.
[37] Nathan Rosenblum, Barton P Miller, and Xiaojin Zhu.
Recovering the toolchain provenance of binary code.
In International Symposium on Software Testing and
Analysis, 2011.
[38] Eric Schulte, Jason Ruchti, Matt Noonan, David Ciarletta,
and Alexey Loginov. Evolving exact decompilation. In
Workshop on Binary Analysis Research (BAR), 2018.
[39] Yan Shoshitaishvili, Michael Weissbacher, Lukas Dresel,
Christopher Salls, Ruoyu Wang, Christopher Kruegel,
and Giovanni Vigna. Rise of the HaCRS: Augmenting
Autonomous Cyber Reasoning Systems with Human
Assistance. In ACM Conference on Computer and
Communications Security (CCS), 2017.
[40] Elliot Soloway, Beth Adelson, and Kate Ehrlich.
Knowledge and processes in the comprehension of
computer programs. The nature of expertise, 1988.
[41] M-AD Storey, Kenny Wong, and Hausi A Müller. How
do program understanding tools affect how programmers understand programs? Science of Computer
Programming, 2000.
[42] Claire Taylor and Christian Collberg. Getting revenge:
A system for analyzing reverse engineering behavior. In
Malware Conference, 2019.
[43] Tree-sitter. https://tree-sitter.github.io/.
[44] Freek Verbeek, Pierre Olivier, and Binoy Ravindran.
Sound c code decompilation for a subset of x86-64
binaries. In International Conference on Software
Engineering and Formal Methods. Springer, 2020.

USENIX Association

[45] Anneliese von Mayrhauser and A Marie Vans. Program
Unterstanding: A Survey. Colorado State Univ., 1994.
[46] Anneliese Von Mayrhauser and A Marie Vans. Program
comprehension during software maintenance and
evolution. Computer, 1995.

(c) Around half of my workload is reversing.
(d) Most or all of my workload is reversing.
5. How much confidence do you have in your reversing
skills?
(a) I have no idea what I’m doing.
(b) I’m still a beginner.
(c) I’m an average reverser.
(d) I’m better than average.
(e) I am an expert.

[47] Anneliese Von Mayrhauser and A. Marie Vans. Identification of dynamic comprehension processes during
large scale maintenance. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, 1996.
[48] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Mazurek. An observational
investigation of reverse engineers’ processes. In 29th
USENIX Security Symposium, 2020.
[49] Tao Wei, Jian Mao, Wei Zou, and Yu Chen. A new
algorithm for identifying loops in decompilation. In
International Static Analysis Symposium, 2007.
[50] Khaled Yakdan, Sebastian Eschweiler, and Elmar
Gerhards-Padilla. Recompile: A decompilation framework for static analysis of binaries. In 8th International
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software:" The
Americas"(MALWARE), 2013.
[51] Khaled Yakdan, Sebastian Eschweiler, Elmar GerhardsPadilla, and Matthew Smith.
No more gotos:
Decompilation using pattern-independent control-flow
structuring and semantic-preserving transformations. In
NDSS, 2015.

A

6. How difficult is completely recreating the source code
of a small binary?
(a) Trivial
(b) Easy
(c) Moderate
(d) Difficult
(e) Impossible
7. How familiar are you with programming in the following
languages? (Range: 1 (Beginner) to 5 (Expert))
(a) C
(b) C++
(c) Go
(d) Rust
(e) Swift
8. How familiar are you with reversing the following
languages? (Range: 1 (Beginner) to 5 (Expert))
(a) C
(b) C++
(c) Go
(d) Rust
(e) Swift

Background Survey

1. What best describes your involvement in computer
security?
(a) Professional
(b) Researcher
(c) Student
(d) Hobbyist
(e) Other

9. How often do you use the following tools when reversing?
(Range: 1 (Never); 2 (Sometimes); 3 (Often))
(a) Angr
(b) Binary Ninja
(c) CLI Tools (objdump, etc.)
(d) Ghidra
(e) Ida / HexRays
(f) Radare
(g) Custom Scripts

2. How many years have you been involved in computer
security?
(a) Integer value: 1 or above.13
3. How many years have you been involved in reverse
engineering?
(a) Integer value: 1 or above.13
4. How much of your paid time is spent reverse engineering?
(a) I’m not paid to reverse anything.
(b) A little bit of my workload is reversing.
13 A programming error prevented users from entering zero.

USENIX Association

B

Follow-Up Survey

The follow-up survey contained repeats of questions 5–9 from
the background survey. Question 9 was re-worded to ask about
tools used during the competition, and included an item for the
D ECOMPERSON web interface. There were also free-form text
inputs where players could give feedback on the challenges,
the interface, or the competition in general.

31st USENIX Security Symposium

2781

C

Table of Challenges
Name

Functionality

Value

Src.

Asm.

Ratio

All

>0%

>20%

>40%

>60%

>80%

100%

C

baby-c
bitesize
prime
rootkit
Subtotal

Integer GCD.
Overflowable buffer.
Primality check.
Linked list search.

200
100
100
100
500

24
30
20
36
110

77
81
117
121
396

3.21
2.70
5.85
3.36
3.60

1,933
2,803
1,670
3,654
10,060

1,445
2,327
1,337
2,913
8,022

1,357
2,302
1,307
2,821
7,787

1,171
2,056
1,013
1,560
5,800

943
1,593
432
1,035
4,003

526
760
282
585
2,153

112
70
56
37
275

arithmetic
types, buffers
arithmetic
structs

C++

Language Features

baby-cpp
lambic
pedigree
streamy
unfair
Subtotal

Scrabble scoring.
Inventory mgmt.
Family tree search.
RPN calculator.
Playfair cipher.

200
400
200
400
200
1,400

49
152
77
146
67
491

441
647
337
622
501
2,548

9.00
4.26
4.38
4.26
7.48
5.19

3,370
815
1,351
895
2,724
9,155

2,553
495
603
593
1,812
6,056

2,259
262
511
467
1,343
4,842

1,685
158
388
394
1,017
3,642

1,270
116
299
267
715
2,667

669
70
183
142
449
1,513

41
4
76
24
15
160

strings, control flow
structs, lambdas, vectors
classes, sets
classes, inheritance, streams
strings, tuples

Go

Submissions by Diff Score

baby-go
batsounds
carshop
fabulous
julie
switcher
wolfgang
Subtotal

FizzBuzz.
TCP echo server.
Inventory search.
Fibonacci sequence.
Julia set ASCII art.
Buggy ROT-13 cipher.
Cellular automaton.

200
300
300
200
300
200
300
1,800

19
44
75
23
79
32
38
310

122
293
400
153
397
153
212
1,730

6.42
6.66
5.33
6.65
5.03
4.78
5.58
5.58

1,592
878
726
1,322
3,156
1,600
918
10,192

1,073
568
352
934
2,725
1,219
717
7,588

902
460
299
825
2,481
1,110
619
6,696

638
383
191
612
2,313
1,039
578
5,754

456
244
163
441
2,219
937
446
4,906

131
149
108
397
1,718
667
358
3,528

38
10
8
15
0
14
3
88

arithmetic
networking, time
structs, enums
structs, arithmetic
syscalls, complex numbers
strings, switches
strings, arithmetic

Rust

Non-Blank Lines

baby-rust
habidasher
s2ring
toobz
Subtotal

Integer parsing.
Two hash functions.
Turing machine.
TCP pipeline.

300
200
500
300
1,300

14
26
74
105
219

222
292
796
385
1,695

15.86
11.23
10.76
3.67
7.74

1,325
498
1,049
652
3,524

975
354
817
415
2,561

765
256
672
363
2,056

388
167
386
335
1,276

270
101
200
288
859

237
81
133
239
690

30
7
8
8
53

matching
strings, arithmetic
strings, structs, matching
traits, networking, lambdas

Swift

Challenges

baby-swift
bandate
cardigan
Subtotal

Hotdog detector.
Date comparison.
Luhn checksum.

300
400
500
1,200

34
55
89
178

489
1,008
1,374
2,871

14.38
18.33
15.44
16.13

1,221
569
809
2,599

750
353
583
1,686

475
314
485
1,274

360
147
387
894

259
85
110
454

138
59
37
234

14
9
4
27

strings, sets
structs, dates
strings, arithmetic

6,200

1,308

9,240

7.06

35,530

25,913

22,655

17,366

12,889

8,118

603

All Challenges

Table 4: Descriptions and statistics for the D ECOMPETITION challenges.

D

Table of Compilers

Language

Compiler

Version

Options

C
C++
Go
Rust
Swift

gcc
g++
go build
rustc
swiftc

9.3.0 -fno-asm -g
9.3.0 -fno-asm -g -std=c++17
1.13.8
1.43.0
5.2.4

Table 5: Compilers used during D ECOMPETITION. All challenges were built for x86-64 on Ubuntu 20.04. The challenge binaries were compiled with the same options, but all debug information was removed from these before distribution. Note that the -fno-asm option only prevents the use of the asm keyword in C and C++; we used an additional
pre-processing step to prohibit the __asm keyword. See the full build scripts in the challenge repository for details:
https://github.com/decompetition/challenges-2020

2782

31st USENIX Security Symposium

USENIX Association

